ORIGINAL RESEARCH ARTICLE
published: 08 January 2015
doi: 10.3389/fgene.2014.00452

Global diversiﬁcation of a tropical plant growth form:
environmental correlates and historical contingencies in
climbing palms
Thomas L. P. Couvreur 1,2 * † , W. Daniel Kissling 3 * † , Fabien L. Condamine 4 , Jens-Christian Svenning 5 ,
Nick P. Rowe 6,7 and William J. Baker 8
1

Institut de Recherche pour le Développement, UMR-DIADE, Montpellier, France
Laboratoire de Botanique Systématique et d’Ecologie, Département des Sciences Biologiques, Université de Yaoundé I – Ecole Normale Supérieure, Yaoundé,
Cameroon
3
Institute for Biodiversity and Ecosystem Dynamics, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands
4
Department of Biological and Environmental Sciences, University of Gothenburg, Göteborg, Sweden
5
Section for Ecoinformatics and Biodiversity, Department of Bioscience, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark
6
University Montpellier 2, Montpellier, France
7
CNRS, UMR AMAP, Montpellier, France
8
Royal Botanic Gardens, Surrey, UK
2

Edited by:
James Edward Richardson, Royal
Botanic Garden Edinburgh, UK
Reviewed by:
Colin Hughes, University of Zurich,
Switzerland
Isabel Sanmartin, Consejo Superior de
Investigaciones Cientíﬁcas, Spain
*Correspondence:
Thomas L. P. Couvreur, Institut de
Recherche pour le Développement,
UMR-DIADE, DYNADIV team, 911,
Avenue Agropolis, F-34394
Montpellier, Cedex 5, France
e-mail: thomas.couvreur@ird.fr;
W. Daniel Kissling, Institute for
Biodiversity and Ecosystem
Dynamics, University of Amsterdam,
P.O. Box 94248, 1090 GE Amsterdam,
Netherlands
e-mail: wdkissling@gmail.com
†These

authors have joint ﬁrst
authorship.

Tropical rain forests (TRF) are the most diverse terrestrial biome on Earth, but the
diversiﬁcation dynamics of their constituent growth forms remain largely unexplored.
Climbing plants contribute signiﬁcantly to species diversity and ecosystem processes
in TRF. We investigate the broad-scale patterns and drivers of species richness as well as
the diversiﬁcation history of climbing and non-climbing palms (Arecaceae). We quantify to
what extent macroecological diversity patterns are related to contemporary climate, forest
canopy height, and paleoclimatic changes. We test whether diversiﬁcation rates are higher
for climbing than non-climbing palms and estimate the origin of the climbing habit. Climbers
account for 22% of global palm species diversity, mostly concentrated in Southeast Asia.
Global variation in climbing palm species richness can be partly explained by past and
present-day climate and rain forest canopy height, but regional differences in residual
species richness after accounting for current and past differences in environment suggest
a strong role of historical contingencies in climbing palm diversiﬁcation. Climbing palms
show a higher net diversiﬁcation rate than non-climbers. Diversiﬁcation analyses of palms
detected a diversiﬁcation rate increase along the branches leading to the most speciesrich clade of climbers. Ancestral character reconstructions revealed that the climbing habit
originated between early Eocene and Miocene. These results imply that changes from
non-climbing to climbing habits may have played an important role in palm diversiﬁcation,
resulting in the origin of one ﬁfth of all palm species. We suggest that, in addition to current
climate and paleoclimatic changes after the late Neogene, present-day diversity of climbing
palms can be explained by morpho-anatomical innovations, the biogeographic history of
Southeast Asia, and/or ecological opportunities due to the diversiﬁcation of high-stature
dipterocarps in Asian TRFs.
Keywords: ClaSSE, BAMM, growth form, lianas, plant traits, rattans, tropical rain forest evolution, Dipterocarpaceae

INTRODUCTION
“The object of all climbing plants is to reach the light and free air with
as little expenditure of organic matter as possible.”
Darwin (1865)

Besides being the most diverse terrestrial ecosystem on Earth,
tropical rain forests (TRF) contain a wide array of growth forms
such as large emergent to small understory trees, shrubs, epiphytes,
lianas, and vines, as well as parasitic plants (Richards, 1996).
Understanding how these different growth forms have originated
and contributed to the diversiﬁcation of TRFs through time provides important insights into the evolution of this biome (e.g.,
Givnish et al., 2014). Anthropogenic disturbances have caused

www.frontiersin.org

signiﬁcant structural changes in TRFs and recent studies indicate that understanding changes in the abundance and biomass
of speciﬁc growth forms has important implications for future
community and ecosystem dynamics in TRFs (Phillips et al., 2002;
Schnitzer and Bongers, 2011).
The climbing growth form (lianas and vines) constitutes a key
component of tropical forests worldwide, contributing considerably to species diversity (between 10–50%), stem density (∼25%),
and ecosystem processes such as forest transpiration and carbon
sequestration (Gentry, 1991; Schnitzer and Bongers, 2002). The
climbing habit is present in more than 130 plant families and
has evolved independently numerous times within angiosperms

January 2015 | Volume 5 | Article 452 | 1

Couvreur et al.

(Gentry, 1991). Across species from different woody plant families,
abundance of climbers in tropical forests is negatively correlated
with mean annual precipitation and positively with seasonality,
peaking in tropical dry forests (Schnitzer, 2005). However, regional
studies of climber abundance do not necessarily support such
results and suggest that structural characteristics of the forests
can be more important than the physical environment (van der
Heijden and Phillips, 2008). There is also large variation in stem
structural properties and hydraulic architectures among climbing
plants (Tomlinson and Fisher, 2000; Rowe et al., 2004) that could
potentially mask environmental controls of speciﬁc lineages in
cross-taxon analyses.
Despite their ecological importance, few studies have investigated the role of the climbing habit in the evolution and
diversiﬁcation of TRF. Based on sister group comparisons of
species richness between climbing and non-climbing clades within
48 angiosperm families, Gianoli (2004) inferred that the climbing habit is a key innovation within ﬂowering plants, leading to
higher species richness than non-climbing sister groups. Wang
et al. (2012) used a generic level dated phylogeny of the largely
climbing TRF family Menispermaceae and found evidence for
a burst of diversiﬁcation shortly after the Cretaceous–Paleogene
boundary, suggesting an important role of the climbing habit in
the diversiﬁcation of TRFs throughout the Cenozoic (this is also
found in ferns; Schneider et al., 2004). Moreover, biogeographic
analyses of the Neotropical tribe Bignonieae (Bignoniaceae) further showed that drivers of climber diversiﬁcation are possibly
related to climate drying and Andean orogeny (Lohmann et al.,
2013).
With about 2,500 species, palms (Arecaceae) are a speciesrich, monocotyledonous plant family characteristic of tropical
and subtropical ecosystems (Dransﬁeld et al., 2008; Couvreur and
Baker, 2013). Palms have limited ability to survive in areas with
cold and arid climates due to structural constraints (Tomlinson,
2006). As a consequence, palm species richness generally peaks
in warm and humid areas with low seasonality (Bjorholm et al.,
2005; Kissling et al., 2012a). However, historical legacies related
to evolutionary history of speciﬁc lineages (Baker and Couvreur,
2013a,b), dispersal limitation (Bjorholm et al., 2006; Kissling et al.,
2012a; Eiserhardt et al., 2013), and the unique history of biogeographic regions (Bjorholm et al., 2006; Kissling et al., 2012a;
Blach-Overgaard et al., 2013; Rakotoarinivo et al., 2013) also play
an important role in shaping global patterns of palm species
richness and distribution.
A large diversity of growth forms has evolved within palms,
including tree palms, palms with clustered stems, acaulescent
palms, and climbing palms (Dransﬁeld, 1978; Dransﬁeld et al.,
2008; Balslev et al., 2011). The climbing habit has evolved independently several times (Baker et al., 2000a), most notably within
subfamily Calamoideae (Table 1), but also in relatively small sets
of species within subfamily Arecoideae in the Neotropical genera Desmoncus and Chamaedorea, and in the Madagascan genus
Dypsis (Table 1). The mainly Southeast Asian Calamus is the most
species-rich genus of palms and is one of the most diverse genera
of climbing plants (Gentry, 1991). Climbing in palms is typically
facilitated by traits such as elongated stems that are stiffened by
cylindrical leaf sheaths distally, the presence of spines on almost

Frontiers in Genetics | Evolutionary and Population Genetics

Evolution of climbing palms

all organs, and wider vessels compared to their self-supporting
counterparts (Tomlinson and Fisher, 2000). In addition, climbing palms have evolved two unique climbing organs: the cirrus,
an extension of the leaf rachis usually equipped with recurved
grapnel-like spines as well and, in some taxa, hook-like reﬂexed
leaﬂets, and the ﬂagellum, a modiﬁed, sterile inﬂorescence also
armed with recurved grapnel-like spines, which is only found in
Calamus. Both are highly efﬁcient attachment structures for climbing (Dransﬁeld et al., 2008; Isnard and Rowe, 2008). However,
palms do not actively twine to gain support, but rather become
anchored passively on adjacent vegetation via these climbing
organs (Putz, 1990).
As in most other monocotyledons, palms lack a vascular cambium for secondary growth. Instead, they retain their primary
anatomical architecture of the stem for their entire life. Nevertheless, they can still achieve remarkable heights of up to 60 m
tall (Sanin and Galeano, 2011). While some tall tree palms having developed mechanical properties to minimize elastic buckling
when achieving large heights (Rich, 1986), there seems to be a
critical threshold that limits palm height growth (Niklas, 1993,
1994). Thus, the tree growth form in palms could be a competitive disadvantage in tall TRF environments where structural and
functional limitations prohibit them from reaching the canopy.
In contrast, climbing palm stems can attain astonishing lengths,
reaching up to 170 m length or even more in Calamus, which represents the longest unrooted aerial plant stem on record (Burkill,
1966). Given the potential importance of forest structure for abundance and distribution of climbers (van der Heijden and Phillips,
2008), it can be hypothesized that on an evolutionary timescale
the global biogeographic differences in tropical rain forest canopy
heights (Lefsky, 2010) might have inﬂuenced the diversiﬁcation of
climbing palms.
Here, we combine macroecological and macroevolutionary
analyses to investigate the role of climbing in the evolutionary history of palms. We quantify global patterns and drivers of climbing
palm diversity and ask what role the climbing habit has played in
the diversiﬁcation of palms through time. Speciﬁcally, we test the
following hypotheses and corresponding predictions:
(1) The diversity of climbing palms correlates with aseasonal
tropical climates and peaks in high-stature forests:
(a) Due to physiological and functional adaptations of palms,
species richness of climbing palms is positively correlated
with temperature and precipitation and negatively with temperature seasonality.
(b) Differences in canopy height among TRFs explain global
variation in species richness of climbing palms, with tall
forests having more climbing species than short-stature
forests.
(2) The climbing habit has played an important role in palm diversiﬁcation:
(a) Diversiﬁcation rates are higher for climbing than nonclimbing palms lineages.
(b) The origin of the climbing habit correlates with increases in
diversiﬁcation rates.

January 2015 | Volume 5 | Article 452 | 2

Couvreur et al.

Evolution of climbing palms

Table 1 | Species diversity of climbers within palm genera.
Genus (# spp./total #)

% climber

Subfamily

Regional distribution

Calamus (348/381)

91

Calamoideae

Afrotropics, Indomalaya, Australasia, Oceania

Ceratolobus (6/6)

100

Calamoideae

Indomalaya

Chamaedorea (1/107)

0.01

Arecoideae

Neotropics

Daemonorops (92/102)

90

Calamoideae

Indomalaya, Australasia

Desmoncus (12/12)

100

Arecoideae

Neotropics

Dypsis (2/144)

0.01

Arecoideae

Afrotropics (Madagascar)

Eremospatha (11/11)

100

Calamoideae

Afrotropics

Korthalsia (27/27)

100

Calamoideae

Indomalaya, Australasia

Laccosperma (6/6)

100

Calamoideae

Afrotropics

Myrialepis (1/1)

100

Calamoideae

Indomalaya

Oncocalamus (5/5)

100

Calamoideae

Afrotropics

Plectocomia (16/16)

100

Calamoideae

Indomalaya

Plectocomiopsis (5/5)

100

Calamoideae

Indomalaya

Pogonotium (2/3)

67

Calamoideae

Indomalaya

Retispatha (1/1)

100

Calamoideae

Indomalaya

TOTAL (535/2445)

22

Data are based on the World Checklist of Palms (Govaerts et al., 2014). Data for the genus Dypsis have been additionally updated (now two climbing species).

MATERIALS AND METHODS
PALM SPECIES DISTRIBUTION DATA

We used data on global palm species distributions from an exhaustive, authoritative checklist of the World’s palm species (Govaerts
et al., 2014, data used here accessed March 2009). Though coarse
in resolution, this dataset currently represents the most complete
and reliable source on species distributions of all palms worldwide.
The dataset records palm species presences and absences across
the world within the level 3 geographic units as deﬁned by the
International Working Group on Taxonomic Databases (TDWG;
Brummitt, 2001). These TDWG level 3 units mostly correspond
to countries and/or major islands, such as Borneo, Madagascar,
and New Guinea, but very large countries such as USA, Brazil, and
China are subdivided into smaller units. We included only native
palm occurrences, excluding introduced occurrences, and doubtful as well as erroneous records. To derive estimates of species
richness, we summed all presences of palm species within each
TDWG level 3 unit, and did this separately for climbing and
non-climbing palms (see below).
The dataset contained a total of 2,445 accepted palm species
names and 5,027 native occurrence records within 194 TDWG
level 3 units (Kissling et al., 2012a). It does not include a recently
described climbing species of Dypsis (Rakotoarinivo and Dransﬁeld, 2010) which would raise the total number of liana species
in this genus to two. The addition of this extra species would not
impact the results presented here, but this new information was
taken into account throughout the discussion and in Table 1.
CATEGORIZATION OF GROWTH FORMS

We classiﬁed all palm species into two growth forms: (1)
climbers, and (2) non-climbers (including all other growth
forms such as stemmed and acaulescent palms). Palm species

www.frontiersin.org

that show leaning growth forms such as some Bactris species
(not really climbers or trees) were considered as non-climbers.
For climbers, we also included palm species that can, within
the same species, show both climbing and non-climbing habits
(only 16 species). The remaining species (n = 2431) were
exclusively climbers or non-climbers. Information on climbing
habit was derived from the literature (Russell, 1968; Dransﬁeld, 1979, 1986; Dransﬁeld and Beentje, 1995; Henderson et al.,
1995; Henderson, 2002, 2009; Dransﬁeld et al., 2008; Dowe,
2010) and for a few species supplemented with expert knowledge.
ENVIRONMENTAL DETERMINANTS OF CLIMBER AND NON-CLIMBER
SPECIES RICHNESS

We tested 14 predictor variables as potential determinants of
species richness in climbing and non-climbing palms. These variables reﬂected contemporary climate (six variables), paleoclimate
(six variables), canopy height (one variable), and biogeographic
region (one variable). Present and past climates (Kissling et al.,
2012a; Blach-Overgaard et al., 2013; Rakotoarinivo et al., 2013)
as well as biogeographic history (Baker and Couvreur, 2013a,b)
are important drivers of broad-scale species distributions and
diversity patterns in palms. Extracted at a coarse resolution
(averaged within TDWG level 3 units), these predictor variables
allow assessing how broad-scale trends in environmental conditions are related to geographic differences in species numbers
of palms worldwide. We acknowledge that ﬁne-scale heterogeneity (e.g. in climates, canopy heights etc.) within TDWG
level units might not be well captured by such coarse-grained
data, but analyses with new species distribution datasets at high
resolution could incorporate some of this heterogeneity in the
future.

January 2015 | Volume 5 | Article 452 | 3

Couvreur et al.

Contemporary climate

To represent contemporary climate, we chose six climatic
predictor variables from the Worldclim dataset (version 1.4;
www.worldclim.org), a set of global climate layers with a spatial
resolution of ca. 1 km2 (Hijmans et al., 2005). We used (1) annual
precipitation (PREC, in mm year−1 ), (2) annual mean temperature (TEMP, in ◦ C × 10), (3) precipitation seasonality measured
as variation of monthly values (PREC SEAS, in mm), (4) temperature seasonality measured as standard deviation of monthly means
(TEMP SEAS, in ◦ C × 10), (5) extremes of drought measured as
precipitation of the driest quarter (PREC DRY, in mm), and (6)
extremes of cold measured as mean temperature of the coldest
quarter (TEMP COLD, in ◦ C × 10). Data extraction and geoprocessing of climate data are described in more detail in Kissling
et al. (2012a). Several of these variables, including PREC and various temperature measures (TEMP, TEMP SEAS, TEMP COLD),
have been identiﬁed as important drivers of the global range and
species richness of palms (Kissling et al., 2012a). Other climate
variables (e.g., minimum or maximum monthly precipitation and
temperature) are highly correlated with these climatic predictors
and were hence not included here.
Paleoclimate

To represent paleoclimatic changes over the Neogene and Quaternary epochs, we compiled both temperature and precipitation data
from paleoclimatic reconstructions representing the Last Glacial
Maximum (LGM, ca. 21,000 years ago), the late Pliocene (∼3 mya),
and the late Miocene (∼10 mya). Data for the LGM were compiled from two climate simulations representing the Community
Climate System Model version 3 (CCSM3) and the Model for
Interdisciplinary Research on Climate version 3.2 (MIROC3.2),
both of which were part of the second phase of the Paleoclimate
Modeling Intercomparison Project1 (PMIP2; Braconnot et al.,
2007). Paleoclimate data for deeper time periods were derived
from coupled ocean–atmosphere general circulation models representing the late Pliocene (3.29–2.97 mya; Haywood et al., 2009)
and the late Miocene (11.61–7.25 mya; Pound et al., 2011). All
paleoclimate data were resampled in ArcGIS with a bilinear interpolation from the original resolution (2.5 , 1◦ , or 2.5◦ ) to the
resolution of the contemporary climate data (see above). We then
calculated anomalies (i.e., the difference between the current climate and the past) for all three time periods as well as for both
precipitation and temperature data, resulting in six paleoclimatic
predictor variables reﬂecting the change in climate since the LGM
(LGMPREC , LGMTEMP ), the Pliocene (PLIOPREC , PLIOTEMP ), and
the Miocene (MIOPREC , MIOTEMP ). Anomalies were measured
by subtracting the paleoclimate value in each TDWG level 3 unit
from its present-day climate (i.e., contemporary climate minus
paleoclimate). Large positive anomaly values indicate a higher
precipitation and temperature in the present than in the past
whereas small or negative anomaly values indicate the opposite,
i.e., higher precipitation and temperature in the past than in the
present. Hence, a negative relationship between species richness
and climate anomalies indicates that species richness is higher
in areas that were relatively wetter or warmer in the past than
1 http://pmip2.lsce.ipsl.fr/

Frontiers in Genetics | Evolutionary and Population Genetics

Evolution of climbing palms

today. TDWG level 3 unit values for LGM precipitation and temperature were calculated as mean values across two paleoclimatic
simulations (CCSM3, MIROC3.2). Note that temperature anomalies since the LGM to the present (LGMTEMP ) can be considered
roughly representative for climatic oscillations of the whole Quaternary (the last 2.6 million years; Jansson, 2003; Kissling et al.,
2012a).
Canopy height

We included canopy height (CANOPY) of tropical rain forests as
a predictor variable to test whether species richness of climbing
palms increases with the tallness of forests. Forest canopy height
data were derived from a recent global map of forest heights
(Lefsky, 2010), derived from LiDAR and multispectral remote
sensing data for forest patches across the world (average patch
size of approximately 25 ± 50 km2 ). The product provides the
90th percentile canopy height as an index that captures the tallest
heights in a given stand (Lefsky, 2010). The original dataset with
a 500 m resolution was geoprocessed in ArcGIS 10 and mean
values of canopy height were calculated at the resolution of the
TDWG level 3 units for which the palm distribution data are
available. Note that the canopy height data only represent natural forests with >70% cover and therefore leave out savannas
and woodlands (Lefsky, 2010). This is unproblematic for palms
which predominantly occur in tropical and subtropical forests.
Biogeographic history

We derived a biogeographic variable (REGION) to capture potential effects related to the long-term history of biogeographic
regions. This categorical variable distinguished seven major
regions: Afrotropics, Australasia, Indomalaya, Nearctic, Neotropics, Oceania, and Palaearctic (Kissling et al., 2012a). It can capture
major differences in species richness and clade distributions
between regions (Kissling et al., 2012a,b; Baker and Couvreur,
2013a,b) and permits examination of how species richness varies
among realms once present-day environment and paleoclimate
have been statistically accounted for (Kissling et al., 2012a).
Statistical analysis of determinants of species richness

We assessed the environmental determinants of species richness
of both climbers and non-climbers with separate multi-predictor
regression models. We only included TDWG level 3 units where
species richness >0 and for which environmental data were
available. A number of smaller islands had to be excluded for nonclimbing palms because canopy height data were not available for
those. Hence, ﬁnal sample sizes for the statistical analysis were
82 and 164 TDWG level 3 units for climbers and non-climbers,
respectively.
We used generalized linear models (GLM) with a Gaussian error
distribution and included all 14 predictor variables as well as either
species richness of climbers or non-climbers as response variable.
We then applied a model selection based on the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) to derive a minimum adequate model that
had the smallest possible number of predictor variables (i.e., the
lowest AIC value; Burnham and Anderson, 2002). We used the
variance inﬂation factors (VIF) to test for multicollinearity among
the predictors included in the regression models, excluding variables with VIF >10 before AIC model selection (TEMP SEAS and

January 2015 | Volume 5 | Article 452 | 4

Couvreur et al.

TEMP COLD for climber richness, TEMP COLD and PREC DRY
for non-climber richness). All continuous predictor variables were
scaled before the analysis (standardized to mean = 0 and SD = 1).
We compared the relative importance of predictor variables to
explain species richness of climbing and non-climbing palms with
semi-standardized coefﬁcients (for continuous variables only).
Both response variables as well as several predictor variables
(TEMP, PREC SEAS, TEMP SEAS, PREC DRY, LGMTEMP ) were
log-transformed to improve normality. We included second order
polynomials to account for non-linear relationships if single
predictor models with polynomials showed statistically signiﬁcant improvements over models without polynomials (using an
ANOVA model comparison at P < 0.05; Crawley, 2007). The reference level of the categorical variable REGION was set to the
Indomalayan region because this allowed us compare all other
regions to the region with the highest species richness of climbing palms (i.e. Indomalaya). For climbing palms, TDWG level 3
sample sizes for the Nearctic, Oceania, and the Palaearctic were
small (n ≤ 1), and statistical analyses of climbing palm species
richness were therefore restricted to the Afrotropics, Australasia,
Indomalaya, and the Neotropics.
To test for a potential inﬂuence of spatial autocorrelation
(Kissling and Carl, 2008), we further calculated Moran’s I values
on the residuals of our minimum adequate GLMs. The geographic
distance for calculating Moran’s I values was based on the closest
neighbor of each TDWG level 3 unit, and signiﬁcance of Moran’s I
was determined by permutation tests (n = 10000 permutations).
Moran’s I values of the residuals of both minimum adequate GLMs
were not statistically signiﬁcant (see Results) and residual spatial
autocorrelation was therefore considered to be unimportant in
our analyses. Hence, there was no need to additionally implement
spatial regression models (Kissling and Carl, 2008). All statistical analyses on determinants of species richness were done with
the R version 3.0.2 (R Development Core Team, 2013). Moran’s I
analyses were conducted using the R library ‘spdep.’
DIVERSIFICATION ANALYSES

Beyond examining the determinants of species richness of
climbers and non-climbers, we performed diversiﬁcation analyses to test whether the evolution of climbers has an impact on
diversiﬁcation rates as a whole and for speciﬁc clades.

Overall diversiﬁcation analysis of climbing palms

We used the Cladogenetic State Speciation and Extinction model
(ClaSSE, Goldberg and Igić, 2012) to test if climbing species have
overall higher diversiﬁcation rates than non-climbing palms. We
generated a species-level phylogeny of palms (i.e., a 2,445 tip dated
phylogeny), based on the genus-level, fossil-calibrated tree of Couvreur et al. (2011a) derived from the global palm supertree of Baker
et al. (2009) as an initial backbone. This phylogenetic tree provides
the most robust hypothesis of relationships between palm genera
to date. We then simulated random species phylogenies at the
tips (i.e., the genera) of this backbone tree using known species
diversity for each genus (see above). This was done 100 times to
get 100 species level trees. We used the script “gratfMissingTaxa”

www.frontiersin.org

Evolution of climbing palms

written by François Michonneau2 and modiﬁed it to simulate
phylogenies under a pure birth model (sim.bdtree function in
APE, Paradis et al., 2004). For each genus, the crown node of the
simulated species-level phylogeny was inserted either (i) randomly
along the whole length of the subtending branch of the genus
(referred to as the ‘non-constrained analysis’), or (ii) following a
uniform distribution between 0.2 and 0.8 (i.e., between 20 and
80% of the whole length of the subtending branch, referred to as
‘constrained analysis’). This latter approach was used to test the
effect of extremely young or old inferred crown node ages on the
results.
Different proportions of climbers and non-climbers within
genera (see Table 1) can create a problem when simulating random
species relationships at the tips of the phylogeny because specieslevel relationships are unknown. A preliminary analysis suggested
that coding all species within climbing genera as climbers (generic
level coding) or coding the observed proportions within each
genus (i.e., coding each species as is) had little effect on the results.
We therefore used the generic level coding approach for subsequent
analyses.
The 100 trees generated above were combined with the trait
dataset of growth forms. The ClaSSE model is a derived model
of the binary state speciation and extinction model (BiSSE)
(Maddison et al., 2007). The ClaSSE model has ten parameters
(Figure 1): two cladogenetic speciation rates without character
change associated with the non-climbing habit (0) [λ000 ; the
abbreviation means that one lineage with state 0 gives two lineages with state 0 and 0 (000)] and the climbing habit (1) (λ111 ),
four cladogenetic speciation rates with character change: (λ110 ),
(λ001 ), (λ100 ), and (λ011 ), two extinction rates associated with
non-climbing (μ1 ) and climbing (μ0 ), and two anagenetic state
change rates with one from climbing to non-climbing (q10 ) and
one from non-climbing to climbing (q01 ). For clarity, we call the
speciation rate that produces two daughter lineages from one parent without character changes (λ000 and λ111 ) the “symmetrical”
speciation rate, and the speciation rate that produces two daughter
lineages from one parent with character changes (λ110 , λ001 , λ100 ,
and λ011 ) the “asymmetrical” speciation rate. Overall, speciation
rates for a given growth form are the sum of symmetrical and
asymmetrical speciation rates estimated by the ClaSSE models.
To identify the best model given our data we considered ten
ClaSSE diversiﬁcation scenarios (Figure 1):
(1) Null model (three free parameters): diversiﬁcation rates are
independent of growth form (λ111 = λ000 = λ110 = λ001 = λ100
= λ011 , μ1 = μ0 , and q10 = q01 ),
(2) Cladogenetic speciation model (eight free parameters):
growth form only affects cladogenetic speciation (λ111  = λ000
= λ110 = λ001 = λ100 = λ011 , μ1 = μ0 , and q10 = q01 ),
(3) Symmetrical cladogenetic speciation model (ﬁve free parameters): growth form only affects symmetrical cladogenetic
speciation (λ111 = λ000 , λ110 = λ001 = λ100 = λ011 , μ1 = μ0 ,
and q10 = q01 ),

2 https://stat.ethz.ch/pipermail/r-sig-phylo/2012-January/001826.html

January 2015 | Volume 5 | Article 452 | 5

Couvreur et al.

FIGURE 1 | The Cladogenetic State Speciation and Extinction model
(ClaSSE) as implemented in this study for climbers and non-climbers in
palms. The ﬁgure highlights the 10 model parameters: two anagenetic

(4) Asymmetrical cladogenetic speciation model (seven free
parameters): growth form only affects asymmetrical cladogenetic speciation (λ111 = λ000 , λ110  = λ001  = λ100 = λ011 ,
μ1 = μ0 , and q10 = q01 ),
(5) Anagenetic state change model (four free parameters): growth form only affects anagenetic state change
(λ111 = λ000 = λ110 = λ001 = λ100 = λ011 , μ1 = μ0 , and
q10 = q01 ),
(6) Extinction model (four free parameters): growth form only
affects the extinction rate (λ111 = λ000 = λ110 = λ001 = λ100 =
λ011 , μ1 = μ0 , and q10 = q01 ),
(7) Cladogenetic speciation and extinction model (nine free
parameters): growth form affects cladogenetic speciation and
extinction (λ111 = λ000  = λ110  = λ001  = λ100  = λ011 , μ1 = μ0 ,
and q10 = q01 ),
(8) Anagenetic state change and extinction model (ﬁve free
parameters): growth form affects anagenetic state change and
extinction (λ111 = λ000 = λ110 = λ001 = λ100 = λ011 , μ1 =
μ0 , and q10 = q01 ),
(9) Cladogenetic and anagenetic state change model (nine free
parameters): growth form affects both cladogenetic speciation and anagenetic state change (λ111  = λ000  = λ110 = λ001
= λ100 = λ011 , μ1 = μ0 , and q10  = q01 ),
(10) Full model (10 free parameters): components of the
diversiﬁcation rate are dependent on the growth form
(λ111 = λ000 = λ110  = λ001  = λ100  = λ011 , μ1  = μ0 , and
q10 = q01 ).
All analyses on both datasets were performed using the Rpackage diversitree 0.7–6 (FitzJohn, 2012). For each tree, we
computed the AICc (AIC corrected for ﬁnite sample sizes) corresponding to each ClaSSE model. In addition, we evaluated the
support for the selected model against all models nested within it
using the likelihood ratio test (LRT, signiﬁcant at P < 0.05). The
scenario supported by the LRT and with the lowest AICc value
was considered the best given the data over all 100 trees. We did
not undertake Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) analyses to

Frontiers in Genetics | Evolutionary and Population Genetics

Evolution of climbing palms

changes (q01 and q10 along the branches), six cladogenetic changes (λ000 ,
λ111 , λ110 , λ001 , λ100 , λ011 ; at the node) and two extinctions (μ1 and μ2 ). See
text for details.

estimate the conﬁdence intervals of the parameters because these
are highly dependent on each individual tree shape and thus have
no real meaning in our context (randomly generated species level
trees). In contrast, the maximum likelihood (ML) analyses are
averaged over all trees and here provide a better way to take the
phylogenetic uncertainty into account.
Clade speciﬁc diversiﬁcation analyses

In order to test for possible shifts in diversiﬁcation rates (speciation
minus extinction) associated with the evolution of the climbing
habit we used the Bayesian Analysis of Macroevolutionary Mixtures approach implemented in BAMM version 2.2.0 (Rabosky,
2014). This analysis is complementary to ClaSSE in that BAMM
tests for rate shifts across lineages whereas ClaSSE investigates the
signiﬁcance of the climbing habit for the diversiﬁcation of the
family as a whole.
The main assumption of previous methods for identifying
diversiﬁcation rate shifts in phylogenies was based on constant
rates between the shifts (e.g., MEDUSA, Alfaro et al., 2009).
This assumption is generally violated, especially in large trees
(Morlon et al., 2011; Morlon, 2014). BAMM explicitly accounts
for rate variation through time and uses a reversible jump
MCMC algorithm to quickly explore numerous candidate models of lineage diversiﬁcation (Rabosky, 2014). BAMM has been
shown to better identify increases/decreases in diversiﬁcation shifts
when compared to other methods such as MEDUSA (Rabosky,
2014).
BAMM accommodates incomplete taxon sampling under a
phylogenetically structured sampling. In our phylogeny, we have
included most palm genera, each one being represented by a single species. We thus provided BAMM with the proportion of
species sampled per genus (i.e., 1/number of species in genus). We
used the chronogram of palm genera as the input tree (Couvreur
et al., 2011a). Priors were estimated with BAMMTools (Rabosky
et al., 2014b) using the function “setBAMMpriors”. A compound
Poisson process is implemented in BAMM for the prior probability of a rate shift along any branch. A prior value of 1.0

January 2015 | Volume 5 | Article 452 | 6

Couvreur et al.

suggests a strong assumption of no rate shifts across the phylogeny. However, prior studies using MEDUSA strongly suggest
rate heterogeneity in palms (Baker and Couvreur, 2013b). We
therefore ran our analyses under two different priors: (1) a value
of 1.0, mainly to re-test the hypotheses that palms underwent
a rate shift at least once in their evolutionary history, and (2)
a value of 0.1 (which generates a more ﬂattened distribution
around six rate shifts) reﬂecting our prior knowledge and from
which we derived our conclusions. In each case, we ran three
independent MCMC for 1.5 million generations sampling event
data every 1000 steps. After checking for convergence of parameter estimates using the effective sampling size (ESS), we re-ran
the analysis for 5 million generations, sampling every 5000
steps.
Post run analyses were undertaken in BAMMTools following Rabosky et al. (2014a). To visualize where in the tree the
shifts occurred, we generated the mean phylorate plot which
represents the mean diversiﬁcation rate (option spex = “se” in
plot.bammdata) sampled from the posterior at any point in time
along any branch of the phylogenetic tree (Rabosky et al., 2014a).
In contrast to methods that identify a single best rate shift
conﬁguration across a tree (e.g., MEDUSA), BAMM identiﬁes a
set of most credible rate shift sets (CSS) ordering them by posterior probability (Rabosky et al., 2014a). Here, we selected the
CSS based on a Bayes factor (BF) of 50 or more. Even though
the BAMM website3 suggests that a BF of ﬁve provides substantial evidence against the null hypothesis (no rate shift along a
branch), we follow the widely cited table of Kass and Raftery (1995)
where strong support should be concluded from BF between
20 and 150.
Finally, we scaled the phylogenetic tree to be proportional to
the BF and marginal probabilities of a rate shift along a branch.
This helps to visualizes the topological location of diversiﬁcation
rate shifts.
ANCESTRAL CHARACTER RECONSTRUCTION

To identify how many times and when the climbing habit arose
in palms above the genus level, we conducted an ancestral
character reconstruction using a stochastic character (posterior)
mapping approach, as implemented in the program SIMMAP
(Huelsenbeck et al., 2003; Bollback, 2006). We used the generic
level chronogram of Couvreur et al. (2011a; 183 tips) and
the genus-level coded dataset (derived from the monomorphic
dataset used for the diversiﬁcation analyses above). This approach
does not take into account the evolution of climbers within
mainly non-climbing genera such as Dypsis and Chamaedorea
(three species only). We also coded the genera Calamus and
Daemonorops (subfamily Calamoideae; subtribe Calaminae) as
ancestrally climbing, even though a few species within each genus
are non-climbers (Table 1). Ancestral states were estimated using
the make.simmap function in the R package phytools (Revell,
2012). Because specifying incorrect prior values can inﬂuence
posterior mapping results (Couvreur et al., 2010) we used the
empirical approach function of make.simmap where the priors (α
and β) of the transformation rate from one character to another
3 http://bamm-project.org/postprocess.html

www.frontiersin.org

Evolution of climbing palms

(γ) were speciﬁed as follows: β = 5 and α = β × ML(Q), with
Q being the transition matrix between both states. This was
achieved using the use.empirical = TRUE option in make.simmap.
We undertook 10,000 generations sampling every 100 steps.
We used the function ‘DensityMap’ in Phytools to depict the
changes in posterior probabilities (PP) along branches of the
phylogeny.

RESULTS
GLOBAL SPECIES RICHNESS OF CLIMBING AND NON-CLIMBING
PALMS

Out of 2,446 palm species in our dataset, a total of 535 species
(22%) were classiﬁed as climbers. The majority of climbing palm
species are found within the genera Calamus (348 species) and
Daemonorops (92 species). In most cases, genera with climbing habits have a high (≥90%) proportion of climbing species
(Table 1). Geographically, climbing palm species occur in all
four major tropical regions (Afrotropics, Australasia, Indomalaya,
Neotropics; Table 1; Figure 2) and two species in Calamus even
reach Oceania. Climber species richness peaked in Indomalaya,
closely followed by Australasia, with the Neotropics showing the
lowest climber richness (Figure 2A). This contrasted to the species
richness of non-climbing palms, which, when compared to other
tropical regions, was highest in the Neotropics and lowest in the
Afrotropics (Figure 2B).
DETERMINANTS OF SPECIES RICHNESS IN CLIMBING PALMS

Among contemporary climatic variables, TEMP (positive effect)
and PREC SEAS (negative effect) were the most important variables to explain climber species richness in the minimum adequate
models (Figures 3B,C; Table 2). Interestingly, PREC SEAS showed
contrasting effects for climbers vs. non-climbers (negative vs.
positive sign). Two additional contemporary climatic variables
(PREC, TEMP SEAS) were of further importance to explain species
richness of non-climbing palms, but not climbers (Table 2). Paleoclimatic changes (anomalies) since the Pliocene (PLIOPREC ) and
Miocene (MIOPREC ) showed negative effects on species richness
of both climbers (Figures 3D,E) and non-climbers (Table 2). This
indicated that areas that were relatively wetter during the late
Pliocene or late Miocene tend to have more palm species today
than areas that were relatively drier in the past. In contrast to
Pliocene and Miocene climate variables, precipitation and temperature anomalies since the LGM were not important to explain
species richness of climbing palms, but the LGMTEMP effect was
important for non-climbing palms (Table 2).
The minimum adequate models included CANOPY as an
important predictor variable for the species richness of both
non-climbing and climbing palms, but the effect was stronger
for climbers than for non-climbing palms (Table 2). The
CANOPY effect on climbing palm species richness was positive
(Figure 3A), supporting the hypothesis that richness increases
with canopy height of forests. In addition to CANOPY and
contemporary climate as well as paleo-climatic variables, biogeographic region (REGION) was also selected in the minimum
adequate models (Table 2). Climbers showed a signiﬁcantly higher
species richness in Indomalaya relative to other tropical regions
(Figure 3F) whereas non-climbers showed a signiﬁcantly lower

January 2015 | Volume 5 | Article 452 | 7

Couvreur et al.

FIGURE 2 | The global distribution of species richness in (A)
climbing and (B) non-climbing palms. Global maps (in Behrmann
projection) show palm species richness for the mass centroids of
geographic units as deﬁned by the International Working Group on
Taxonomic Databases (TDWG level 3 units). Differences in species
richness between major regions are illustrated in boxplots (left).

species richness in the Afrotropics relative to Indomalaya and the
Neotropics (Table 2). These results were similar to the trends in
raw species richness among realms (Figure 2), but they additionally accounted for major differences in contemporary climate,
canopy height, and paleoclimate. This suggests that deep-time historical effects beyond those driven by Quaternary and late Neogene
climate contribute substantially to the major differences in species
richness of climbers and non-climbers among regions.
DIVERSIFICATION ANALYSES

Comparing the ten ClaSSE diversiﬁcation models revealed that
model 7, the cladogenetic speciation and extinction model, was
the best ﬁtting model based on average AICc values from the 100
trees (Table 3). This was not only the case for the unconstrained
analysis but also for the constrained analysis. This model suggested
that the anagenetic state change rates between climbing and nonclimbing palms are equal (q1−0 = q0−1 , Figure 1), while all other
parameters are signiﬁcantly different. Climbers had on average signiﬁcantly higher speciation and extinction rates when compared
to non-climbers (Table 3).
The BAMM analyses reached a stationary state well before
100,000 generations in all independent runs. The ESS values for
the number of shifts and the log-likelihood were always above 200,
indicating appropriate sampling of parameters from the posterior.
Under the Poisson prior of 1.0, the zero rate shift model was rarely

Frontiers in Genetics | Evolutionary and Population Genetics

Evolution of climbing palms

Different letters in boxplots indicate signiﬁcant differences (at
P < 0.05) between realms as indicated by multiple pair-wise
comparisons using ANOVA with a subsequent Tukey’s honestly
signiﬁcant difference post hoc test. Boxes represent the interquartile
range, horizontal lines within the boxes represent medians, and
whiskers extend to the most extreme data points.

sampled from the posterior, strongly supporting the hypothesis of diversiﬁcation rate heterogeneity across palms. Based on
a Poisson prior of 0.1, the most probable number of rates shifts
was 9 (PP = 0.135), closely followed by 8 (PP = 0.132), and 10
(PP = 0.131). This means that diversiﬁcation rates have changed
9, 8, or 10 times across the history of palms.
The phylorate plot shows an increase in mean diversiﬁcation
rates at the crown node of subtribe Calaminae (depicted by an
arrow in Figure 4A). Calaminae is the largest clade of climbing
palms containing around 20% of all palms species (Dransﬁeld
et al., 2008). We can also note an increase in diversiﬁcation rates
for subtribe Bactridinae, which contains one genus of climbing
palms (Desmoncus). Other climber dominated clades do not show
such increases.
The six most probable CSS’s (with a cumulative PP of 0.614,
Figure 5) show that signiﬁcant rate increases (red circles) are
mainly located on the branches leading to part of the tribe Areceae,
most of tribe Trachycarpeae and most of subtribe Bactridinae. No
signiﬁcant rate shifts within theses sets were identiﬁed in relation
to climbing dominated clades mainly found within Calamoideae
(Figure 5). Figure 6 represents the phylogenetic tree of palms
where branch lengths were scaled to their BF (a) or marginal probabilities (b) of containing a rate shift. The shift in probability for
subtribe Calaminae is visible in both cases but not signiﬁcant when
compared to other branches across palms.

January 2015 | Volume 5 | Article 452 | 8

Couvreur et al.

FIGURE 3 | Key determinants of the global distribution of species
richness of climbing palms. Partial residual plots show the effects of
continuous (A–E) and categorical (F) predictor variables from the
minimum adequate model (Table 2) on climbing palm species richness

ANCESTRAL CHARACTER RECONSTRUCTION

Posterior mapping identiﬁed 4.9 average transformations from
the non-climbing to the climbing state across the 100 trees, and
0.61 transformations in the opposite direction (reversals). These
results do not include the three climbing species within the genera
Dypsis and Chamaedorea, but in terms of timing of the origin of
climbers in palms this omission has no effect on the results. The
ancestral state of the crown nodes of the subtribes Calaminae,
Plectocomiinae, and Ancistrophyllinae were strongly supported as
climbing [PP(1) = 1.00; 0.99; 0.98, respectively]. Figure 4B shows
that the climbing habit ﬁrst evolved in palms along the branch
leading to the crown node of subtribe Ancistrophyllinae during
the early Eocene (55–47 mya). A second and third origin of the
climbing habit was dated to the late Eocene and early Oligocene
(44–33 mya) along the branches leading to the crown nodes of the
subtribes Plectocomiinae and Calaminae. The timing of the two
last origins could not be estimated, having evolved along the stem
node of the South American genus Desmoncus and the Southeast
Asian genus Korthalsia (Figure 4B).

DISCUSSION
ENVIRONMENTAL AND GEOGRAPHIC CORRELATES OF CLIMBING PALM
SPECIES RICHNESS

Our results show that climbing palm species richness is associated
with present-day climate (temperature, precipitation seasonality)
and paleoclimatic changes since the late Neogene (Miocene and

www.frontiersin.org

Evolution of climbing palms

once all other variables in the model are statistically controlled for.
Sampling units as in Figure 2. Details of boxplots as in
Figure 2. Region: IND, Indomalaya; AFR, Afrotropics; AUS, Australasia;
NEO, Neotropics.

Pliocene; Table 2; Figure 3). An increase in species richness with
higher temperatures was observed for both climbers and nonclimbers which is in line with our hypothesis (prediction 1a) and
consistent with ﬁndings on global palm diversity patterns (Kissling
et al., 2012a). This relationship reﬂects the limited physiological
and functional adaptations of palms, which reduce their survival in
areas with cold climates (Tomlinson, 2006). However, the missing
effect of temperature seasonality and the observed negative effect
of precipitation seasonality on species richness of climbers are
opposite to that of non-climbers (Table 2). The negative correlation with precipitation seasonality also contrasts with woody
climbing plants, which increase (rather than decrease) in diversity with precipitation seasonality (Schnitzer, 2005). These trends
could be explained by climbing palms being mostly found within
Calamoideae, a subfamily that is constrained to warm and humid
environments (Baker et al., 2000c; Couvreur et al., 2011a). The
effect of precipitation changes (rather than absolute levels of contemporary precipitation) is also supported by the paleoclimatic
effects in our regression models, which showed that Miocene and
Pliocene precipitation anomalies had negative effects on climbing
palm species richness. Hence, areas that were relatively wetter during the late Miocene or late Pliocene today have more climbing
palm species than areas that were drier in the past. This suggests
that multimillion-year non-equilibrium dynamics in diversity–
climate relationships play a role in explaining present-day diversity
of palms (Blach-Overgaard et al., 2013).

January 2015 | Volume 5 | Article 452 | 9

Couvreur et al.

Evolution of climbing palms

Table 2 | Multiple-predictor regression models to explain global species richness of climbing (n = 534) and non-climbing (n = 1911) palms.
Palm species richness
Climbers
Standard coefficient

Non-climbers
P

Standard coefficient

P

Intercept

2.798

***

2.413

CANOPY

0.403

**

0.227

*

CANOPY2

NA

0.063

n.s.

PREC

−

0.271

n.s.

TEMP

0.421

***

0.539

***

*

0.219

n.s.

0.044

n.s.

PREC SEAS

−0.356

PREC SEAS2

NA

TEMP SEAS

−

−0.507

TEMP SEAS2

−

NA

PREC DRY

−

NA

PREC DRY2

NA

NA

TEMP COLD

−

NA

TEMP COLD2

−

NA

LGMPREC

−

−

−

NA

LGMPREC

2

LGMTEMP

−

PLIOPREC

−0.274

PLIOPREC 2

NA

PLIOTEMP

−
−0.183

MIOPREC
MIOPREC

2

MIOTEMP

***

*

**

0.220

n.s.

−0.070

n.s.

−0.201

*

−
n.s.

NA
−

−0.001

n.s.

−0.190

*

−

REGION
Afrotropics

−1.359

***

−1.098

***

Australasia

−1.786

***

0.078

n.s.

Neotropics

−1.773

***

0.658

n.s.

Oceania

NA

−0.057

n.s.

Nearctic

NA

−0.854

n.s.
*

Palearctic

NA

−0.855

AIC

200

443

R2

0.69

0.70

Moran’s I

−0.13

n.s.

0.11

n.s.

Based on the AIC, a minimum adequate model was selected from the full set of predictor variables after removing those variables that showed high multicollinearity.
Standardized coefﬁcients are given for continuous predictor variables (scaled before the analysis to mean = 0 and SD = 1). The effect of the categorical variable
REGION is relative to Indomalaya. Statistically signiﬁcant effects of continuous and categorical variables are highlighted in bold. Sampling units are International
Working Group on Taxonomic Databases (TDWG) level 3 units (n = 82 for climbers; n = 164 for non-climbers). ‘–’ indicates not selected variables, ‘NA’ not available
variables or categorical levels. Residual spatial autocorrelation was tested using Moran’s I values based on the closest neighbor of each TDWG level 3 unit. Species
richness and several continuous predictor variables (TEMP, PREC SEAS, TEMP SEAS, PREC DRY, LGMTEMP ) were log10 transformed. Abbreviations of predictor
variables: CANOPY, canopy height; PREC, annual precipitation; TEMP, annual mean temperature; PREC SEAS, precipitation seasonality; TEMP SEAS, temperature
seasonality; PREC DRY, precipitation of driest quarter; TEMP COLD, Mean temperature of coldest quarter; LGMPREC , Last Glacial Maximum precipitation anomaly;
LGMTEMP , Last Glacial Maximum temperature anomaly; PLIOPREC , Pliocene precipitation anomaly; PLIOTEMP , Pliocene temperature anomaly; MIOPREC , Miocene
precipitation anomaly; MIOTEMP , Miocene temperature anomaly; REGION, biogeographic region (categorical variable, effects are relative to the Indomalayan region).
Signiﬁcance levels: ***P < 0.001; **P < 0.01; *P < 0.05; n.s., not signiﬁcant. R2 , explained variance.

Frontiers in Genetics | Evolutionary and Population Genetics

January 2015 | Volume 5 | Article 452 | 10

Couvreur et al.

Evolution of climbing palms

Table 3 | Inferred rates of speciation and extinction for climbing and non-climbing palms using the Cladogenetic State Speciation and Extinction
model (ClaSSE) for the best fitting model (model 7) out of ten (see Figure 1).
Model

df

logL

AICc

λ000

λ001

λ011

λ100

λ110

λ111

μ0

μ1

q01 = q10

Model 7 (non-constrained)

9

−5582

11182

0,64

0,00004

0,00015

0,00021

0,00002

0,87

0,61

0,8

0,00002

0,011

0,00001

0,00001

0,00004

0,00001

0,094

0,012

0,097

0

9

−5768

11554

0,53

0,00002

0,0002

0,00022

0,000001

0,58

0,485

0,491

0,00001

0,00504

0,000008

0,00001

0,00005

0,000001

0,022

0,005

0,025

0.000002

SE
Model 7 (constrained)
SE

In model 7 (non-constrained analysis), simulated crown nodes were allowed to vary between 0 and 100% of the whole length of the subtending branch of the genus.
In model 7 (constrained analysis), the crown node of genera were restricted to be between 20 and 100% of the whole length of the subtending branch of the genus
(see Materials and Methods). df, degrees of freedom; LogL, likelihood of model; AICc , Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) correction for ﬁnite sample sizes.

Our results further support the hypothesis that climbing palms
are more diverse in tall-stature forests than in lower canopy
ones (Figure 3A; hypothesis and prediction 1b). Forest canopy
is not uniform across continents, being highest in Southeast
Asia and Africa when compared to South America and Australia (Banin et al., 2012). Indeed, higher canopies and larger
trees could arguably provide a three dimensional space that is
more effectively exploited by certain kinds of climbing plants,
particularly climbing palms. First, higher forests have a more
patchy canopy because they have larger gaps in between tree
trunks and fewer large trees reaching maximum heights (e.g.,
dipterocarp forests, see below, Richards, 1996). Second, larger
trees can lead to larger tree-fall gaps, which has been shown to
maintain a higher diversity of climber species in general (Putz,
1984; Schnitzer and Carson, 2001). However, in contrast to nonmonocot lianas (Schnitzer, 2005) the majority of climbing palms
might be less tolerant of strong disturbances. This is probably also
reﬂected in the negative relationship of palm species richness with
PREC SEAS (Table 2), which is opposite to dicotyledonous lianas
(Schnitzer, 2005). Third, climbing palms have developed particularly long and light stiff “searcher-stems” compared with many
other woody climbers, and they also produce long and sharptoothed cirri and ﬂagella. These climbing traits are particularly
effective for spanning large gaps between large and tall canopy
trees.
As indicated by Isnard and Rowe (2008), there is relatively
little developmental and anatomical difference between climbing and non-climbing palms compared with clades of woody
species in which climbers can develop highly derived and complex stem structures via anomalous secondary growth. Since the
arguably more “simple” palm organization can develop effective “liana”-sized climbers it is intriguing that palms have not
evolved the climbing habit more often and more widely, especially
in the Neotropics. With just seven species, the Neotropics contain few representatives of the subfamily Calamoideae (Dransﬁeld
et al., 2008) and the observed diversity anomaly among regions
could thus be related to phylogenetic constraints within palms
(Bjorholm et al., 2006). Compared with the Calamoideae, few
climbers have evolved within the Arecoideae (the largest palm subfamily in general and also within the Neotropics, Pintaud et al.,
2008; Figure 4). This is reﬂected in genera such as Chamaedorea and Dypsis (Madagascar), which each contain one and
two climbing species out of 110 and 140 species, respectively

www.frontiersin.org

(Dransﬁeld et al., 2008). The failure to diversify as climbers might
be related to the fact that they are non-spiny, in contrast to the
majority of other climbers in the Calamoideae. The only exception in Arecoideae is the Neotropical spiny genus Desmoncus
(Figure 4), which has a currently reported diversity between 12
and 24 species (Isnard et al., 2005; Henderson, 2011). Other tropical plant families show a similar pattern of low climber diversity
in the Neotropics compared to the Paleotropics. For example,
Annonaceae, an important TRF plant family (Couvreur et al.,
2011b), have a single climbing species in the Neotropics compared to ∼500 species in the Paleotropics. This might point toward
potential phylogenetic constraints on certain plant families to successfully evolve and diversify as climbers in a given region. Some
families might be particularly successful in their evolution toward
a climbing form in one region, for example, the Neotropics (e.g.,
Bignoniaceae; Lohmann et al., 2013) whereas others might not
(e.g., palms and Annonaceae).
THE EVOLUTIONARY DIVERSIFICATION OF CLIMBING PALMS

Evidence suggests that the evolution of climbers promoted diversiﬁcation within angiosperms (Gianoli, 2004). The diversiﬁcation
history of palms has not been homogenous across time (Baker
and Couvreur, 2013b), and our results based on an improved
diversiﬁcation analysis approach (Rabosky, 2014) conﬁrms this
hypothesis. Indeed, a total of nine rate shifts across palms were
detected with the highest posterior probability.
The analyses presented here suggest an important evolutionary
role of climbers in explaining present-day palm diversity (hypothesis 2). Our ClaSSE analyses indicated that across palms, species
with a climbing habit diversiﬁed on average 1.3 times faster when
compared to species with a non-climbing habit (λ111 > λ000 ; see
Table 3, prediction 2a). Elevated diversiﬁcation rates for particular clades are highly dependent on young estimated crown node
ages (Linder, 2008). In our case, young crown node ages of large
climbing genera such as Calamus and Daemonorops will strongly
pull toward higher speciation rates for climbers compared to nonclimbers. An inverse result would occur if crown node ages were
inferred to be very old for both these genera. Unfortunately, to
date no valid estimations of crown nodes exist for genera within
Calaminae. By constraining the crown node ages of all genera in
our simulations to be between 20 and 80% of the stem node age
(‘constrained analysis’), we avoided bias due to very old or very
young crown node ages. Under these conditions, the climbing

January 2015 | Volume 5 | Article 452 | 11

Couvreur et al.

FIGURE 4 | Evolutionary history of the climbing habit in palms.
(A) Phylorate plot of the mean diversiﬁcation rates sampled from the
posterior (red = high diversiﬁcation rates; blue = low diversiﬁcation rates)
resulting from the BAMM output using the dated generic-level
chronogram (Couvreur et al., 2011a) in millions of years ago (mya). Each
terminal branch represents a genus. The ﬁgure also shows the
phylogenetic distribution of genera that include climbing species either
containing entirely or mainly climbing species (red circles) or mainly
non-climbing species (one or two species of climbers, blue circles). All
other non highlighted genera are strictly non-climbers. The arrow indicates
the crown node of subtribe Calaminae. Numbers refer to subtribes or

Frontiers in Genetics | Evolutionary and Population Genetics

Evolution of climbing palms

genera (1: Ancistrophyllinae; 2: Korthalsiinae (Korthalsia); 3:
Plectocomiinae; 4: Calaminae; 5: Desmoncus; 6: Chamaedorea; 7: Dypsis.
(B) DensityMap plot of the posterior probabilities (PP) of state 1
(climbing, blue) vs. state 0 (non-climbing, red) along branches based on
10,000 generations using SIMMAP. The arrow indicates the crown node of
subtribe Calaminae. The ﬁve state changes from non-climbing to climbing
are represented by a change in color from blue to red. Photos illustrate
typical climbing palms: (C) Korthalsia zippelii from Papua New Guinea
(Photo: William J. Baker, www.palmweb.org), and (D) Laccosperma
robustum, a frequent species throughout Central Africa (Photo: Thomas
L. P. Couvreur, www.palms.myspecies.info).

January 2015 | Volume 5 | Article 452 | 12

Couvreur et al.

FIGURE 5 | Most probable combination of diversification rate shifts
across palms. The six most credible rate shift sets (CSS) with the
highest posterior probability using a Bayes factor (BF) threshold of 50
based on the dated generic-level chronogram (Couvreur et al., 2011a).
For each distinct shift conﬁguration, the locations of diversiﬁcation
rate shifts are shown with ﬁlled circles (red = rate acceleration).

habit was also found to have signiﬁcantly higher speciation rates,
albeit slightly smaller in magnitude (Table 3).
Despite the overall higher diversiﬁcation rate associated to
climbers, the impact of the climbing trait on the diversiﬁcation of speciﬁc clades is unclear (prediction 2a). Based on the
analysis of the BAMM output, an increase in diversiﬁcation
rates (Figure 4A) is detected around the crown node of subtribe Calaminae (subfamily Calamoideae), the most species rich
clade of climbing palms with around 500 Southeast Asian species
(Dransﬁeld et al., 2008). Surprisingly, however, this increase is
not signiﬁcant when compared to other diversiﬁcation rate shifts
found across the family (Figures 5 and 6). Nevertheless, a previous

www.frontiersin.org

Evolution of climbing palms

Circle size is proportional to the marginal probability of that shift.
Letters highlight clades that are associated with signiﬁcant rates
shifts (Ba, Bactridinae; Tr, Trachycarpeae; Ar, Areceae). The increase in
diversiﬁcation rates leading to the most species-rich clade of climbing
palms, subtribe Calaminae (Ca), was not signiﬁcant within the ﬁrst
six CSS.

diversiﬁcation study using the same phylogenetic tree and data but
based on a ML stepwise AIC approach implemented in MEDUSA
identiﬁed two signiﬁcant rate increases at the stem nodes of
Calamus and Daemonorops, both genera belonging to Calaminae
(Baker and Couvreur, 2013b). In addition, Calamus was found
to have signiﬁcantly more species than expected under a constant birth–death rate model as well as have signiﬁcantly higher
diversiﬁcation rates when compared to other genera under a
high extinction rate assumption (Baker and Couvreur, 2013b).
Even though these results should be interpreted with caution,
taken together they support the idea that the evolution of the
climbing habit in Calaminae positively impacted diversiﬁcation

January 2015 | Volume 5 | Article 452 | 13

Couvreur et al.

FIGURE 6 | Topological location of diversification rate shifts across
palms. The Bayes Factor (BF) (A) and marginal probabilities (B) of rate
shifts are proportional to branch lengths. Major palm clades associated
with rate shifts are highlighted. For subtribe Calaminae, the largest clade

rates in palms resulting in the speciation of a ﬁfth of all palm
species.
The increase in diversiﬁcation rates in Bactridinae does not
appear to be related to the climbing habit that evolved in the genus
Desmoncus. Indeed, this rate increase, which was also detected with
the MEDUSA analysis (rate shift 8 of Baker and Couvreur, 2013b
that included Desmoncus, Bactris, and Astrocaryum), concerns
most of this subtribe (excluding Acrocomia, Figure 5) and was suggested to be related to the evolution of epidermal spines, a common
trait of all Bactridinae members which functions as a protection
against herbivory in the Neotropics (Baker and Couvreur, 2013b).
The ancestral state reconstructions indicated that the climbing
habit evolved a minimum of ﬁve independent times in palms: four
times in Calamoideae and once in Arecoideae (Figure 4B). These
results are consistent with the inferences for Calamoideae of Baker
et al. (2000a). However, the climbing habit arose at least seven
independent times because of the three climbing species within
Dypsis and Chamaedorea that were not taken into account in the
analysis presented here (both genera coded as non-climbing). At
least in Chamaedorea, the single climbing species (C. elatior) is
nested within the genus validating this assumption (Cuenca and
Asmussen-Lange, 2007). In addition, these independent evolutions will be valid if our coding assumptions of Calamus and

Frontiers in Genetics | Evolutionary and Population Genetics

Evolution of climbing palms

of climbing palms, a shift probability is visible along its root branch in
both cases, but it is not signiﬁcant when compared to other rate shifts
in palms. Scale bars represent the value of the branch lengths for the
BF (A) and the marginal probabilities (B).

Daemonorops as ancestrally “climber” are also correct. Indeed,
both these genera have a small proportion of non-climbing species
(Table 1), and in this study we did not take them into account (both
genera coded as climbers). The phylogenetic relations within both
genera and for the subtribe Calaminae in general remain insufﬁciently understood and the exact placement of the non-climbing
species is unresolved (Baker et al., 2000b).
Our results reveal an interesting pattern: the climbing habit
appears to have had an impact on diversiﬁcation rates in Calaminae, but not in other clades/genera where it evolved (Ancistrophyllinae, Plectocomiinae, Korthalsia, Desmoncus). For example,
the climbing subtribes Ancistrophyllinae and Plectocomiinae
(Figure 4A) have relatively old stem node ages associated with few
extant species (Dransﬁeld et al., 2008; Sunderland, 2012; Baker
and Couvreur, 2013a; Faye et al., 2014). Why did the climbing
habit have such an important effect on the diversiﬁcation in
a particular clade and not in other clades? One reason might
be that different morphological adaptations are underlying the
“same” trait (Donoghue, 2005), i.e., that convergent evolution
(homoplasy) is constructed quite differently in different lineages
and therefore has different impacts on diversiﬁcation rates. For
instance, in palms the climbing habit in different clades is associated with different combinations of morphological characters

January 2015 | Volume 5 | Article 452 | 14

Couvreur et al.

(Baker et al., 2000a; Isnard, 2006). Comparative studies of anatomical characters between Calaminae (Calamus and Daemonorops)
and Desmoncus and subtribe Plectocomiinae (although based on
the study of a few species) suggest that the evolution of a more ﬂexible stem within subtribe Calaminae could explain the outstanding
diversiﬁcation of this group in terms of climbing mechanics (Rowe
et al., 2004; Isnard, 2006). In addition, the evolution of a unique
climbing organ (the ﬂagellum, a modiﬁed inﬂorescence) has taken
place within Calamus (Dransﬁeld et al., 2008) and might have provided an additional advantage over other climbing structures in
palms. Moreover, the presence of a “knee” a swelling at the junction of the leaf sheath and petiole, in most species in subtribe
Calaminae and, to some extent, the African genus Eremospatha
has been suggested as a potentially important trait for enhancing leaf strength at this important stress point (Isnard and Rowe,
2008). Overall, the repeated homoplasious occurrence of the
climbing habit in the Calamoideae (‘clustered homoplasy’) could
also indicate a more cryptic evolutionary innovation related to
genetic or developmental precursors (Marazzi et al., 2012). In
subfamily Calamoideae, this could be related to the tendency
of organizing epidermal emergences as whorls, which manifest
themselves, for example, both in the characteristic scales on the
fruits as well as in organized grapnel spines on climbing organs.
Finally, some life history traits might also act against increasing diversiﬁcation rates. Indeed, Plectocomiinae and the genera
Korthalsia (Korthalsiinae, Figure 4C) and Laccosperma (Ancistrophyllinae, Figure 4D) are hapaxanthic (individual stems die after
a single ﬂowering event), a condition which is generally not associated with high species richness across palms (Dransﬁeld et al.,
2008). Thus, several morphological novelties of subtribe Calaminae absent from other climbing genera (more ﬂexible stems,
the evolution of a ﬂagellum in Calamus, the better mechanical role of the leaf sheath under stress, and the presence of a
knee) possibly played decisive functional roles in explaining the
diversiﬁcation of this group when compared to other climbing
palms.
Explaining geographic differences in diversiﬁcation rates (e.g.,
numerous climbing species in Southeast Asia vs. few in the
Neotropics) might be related to the fact that a particular trait
only increases diversiﬁcation rates under certain environmental
conditions (de Queiroz, 2002). For instance, a highly dynamic
geographic setting linked to a complex biogeographic history
of Southeast Asia (Hall, 2009) might be important in explaining the extraordinary diversiﬁcation of rattans in this region
(Baker and Couvreur, 2012). The estimated increase in diversiﬁcation rates around the crown node of subtribe Calaminae
(34 Ma, Figure 4A) coincides with a period of important geological activity (Oligocene, early Miocene) induced by the collision
of Sundaland and Australia (Hall, 2009). The Oligocene–Miocene
boundary was also an important climatic transition going from a
seasonally dry to an everwet aseasonal climate (Morley, 2007).
In line with our results, numerous other studies have underlined the importance of the Miocene in the diversiﬁcation of
the Southeast Asian ﬂora (Morley, 2007; Su and Saunders,
2009; Lohman et al., 2011; Nauheimer et al., 2012; Thomas et al.,
2012; Bacon et al., 2013; Buerki et al., 2013; Richardson et al.,
2014).

www.frontiersin.org

Evolution of climbing palms

One important and characteristic plant family in Southeast
Asia is Dipterocarpaceae (Appanah and Turnbull, 1998), with
major peaks in diversity in Malaysia and mainland Southeast Asia.
Its species are generally large emergent trees, which often dominate the upper canopy of the region’s forests, contributing to the
much taller stature of the forests in this region relative to, e.g.,
the Neotropics (Richards, 1996). Interestingly, the ﬁrst record of
the family Dipterocarpaceae in Southeast Asia (Borneo) after its
dispersal from India (Dutta et al., 2011) as well as the start of its
estimated radiation in the region (Morley, 2000) correspond to the
timing of increased diversiﬁcation rates within the Calamoideae
(Oligocene to early Miocene). We therefore hypothesize that the
diversiﬁcation of dipterocarps in combination with the evolution
of several morpho-anatomical traits in Calaminae species could
have triggered the radiation of climbing palms in this region. Ecological opportunity responses of one clade based on the success of
another have been suggested in other cases such as ferns (Schneider et al., 2004) or ants (Moreau et al., 2006) during the radiation
of angiosperms.

CONCLUSION
Global diversity patterns of climbing palms show a diversity
anomaly relative to other palms, with a strong peak of species
richness in Southeast Asian rain forests and low species richness in other regions (e.g., the Neotropics). Present-day climate,
forest canopy heights, and paleoclimatic changes in the Neogene and Quaternary can partly explain this pattern, but they do
not provide a sufﬁcient explanation for the extraordinary diversiﬁcation of climbing palms in Southeast Asia. An increase in
diversiﬁcation rates in Calaminae, even though not signiﬁcant
based on our data, relative to other climbers and non-climbers
might instead be the outcome of anatomical and morphological innovations, the complex biogeographic history of Southeast
Asia, and/or ecological opportunity responses to the regional
presence and diversiﬁcation of tall canopy trees such as dipterocarps. We suggest that, in addition to climatic and paleoclimatic
factors, such historical and evolutionary contingencies play an
important role in explaining present-day biodiversity across TRFs.
New datasets (e.g., global high-quality species distribution data
at ﬁne resolutions, well resolved species-level phylogenies, and
additional morphological trait data) as well as novel analytical
tools will likely increase our knowledge of palm diversiﬁcation
and our understanding of tropical rain forest evolution in the
future.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank John Dransﬁeld for species-level information about
climbing palms and Yanis Bouchenak-Khelladi for discussions
and help with R scripts and diversiﬁcation analyses. We are also
grateful to two anonymous reviewers whose comments improved
this manuscript. We thank James Richardson, Valenti Rull, and
Toby Pennington for inviting us to submit our work to this
special issue. W. Daniel Kissling acknowledges a University of
Amsterdam (UvA) starting grant. Jens-Christian Svenning was
supported by the European Research Council (ERC-2012-StG310886-HISTFUNC) and the Danish Council for Independent
Research | Natural Sciences (12-125079).

January 2015 | Volume 5 | Article 452 | 15

Couvreur et al.

REFERENCES
Alfaro, M. E., Santini, F., Brock, C., Alamillo, H., Dornburg, A., Rabosky, D. L.,
et al. (2009). Nine exceptional radiations plus high turnover explain species
diversity in jawed vertebrates. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 106, 13410–13414.
doi:10.1073/pnas.0811087106
Appanah, S., and Turnbull, J. M. (1998). A Review of Dipterocarps: Taxonomy, Ecology
and Silviculture. Bogor: CIFOR.
Bacon, C. D., Michonneau, F., Henderson, A. J., Mckenna, M. J., Milroy, A. M.,
and Simmons, M. P. (2013). Geographic and taxonomic disparities in species
diversity: dispersal and diversiﬁcation rates across Wallace’s line. Evolution 67,
2058–2071. doi: 10.1111/evo.12084
Baker, W. J., and Couvreur, T. L. P. (2012). “Biogeography and distribution patterns of Southeast Asian palms,” in Biotic Evolution and Environmental Change
in Southeast Asia, eds D. Gower, K. Johnson, J. E. Richardson, B. Rosen, L.
Rüber, and S. Williams (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press), 164–190. doi:
10.1017/CBO9780511735882.009
Baker, W. J., and Couvreur, T. L. P. (2013a). Global biogeography and diversiﬁcation of palms sheds light on the evolution of tropical lineages. I. Historical
biogeography. J. Biogeogr. 40, 274–285. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2699.2012.02795.x
Baker, W. J., and Couvreur, T. L. P. (2013b). Global biogeography and diversiﬁcation
of palms sheds light on the evolution of tropical lineages. II: diversiﬁcation history
and origin of regional assemblages. J. Biogeogr. 40, 286–289. doi: 10.1111/j.13652699.2012.02794.x
Baker, W. J., Dransﬁeld, J., and Hedderson, T. A. (2000a). Phylogeny, character
evolution, and a new classiﬁcation of the calamoid palms. Syst. Bot. 25, 297–322.
doi: 10.2307/2666644
Baker, W. J., Hedderson, T. A., and Dransﬁeld, J. (2000b). Molecular phylogenetics of
calamus (Palmae) and related rattan genera based on 5S nrDNA spacer sequence
data. Mol. Phylogenet. Evol. 14, 218–231. doi: 10.1006/mpev.1999.0697
Baker, W. J., Hedderson, T. A., and Dransﬁeld, J. (2000c). Molecular phylogenetics of
subfamily calamoideae (Palmae) based on nrDNA ITS and cpDNA rps16 intron
sequence data. Mol. Phylogenet. Evol. 14, 195–217. doi: 10.1006/mpev.1999.0696
Baker, W. J., Savolainen, V., Asmussen-Lange, C. B., Chase, M. W., Dransﬁeld, J.,
Forest, F., et al. (2009). Complete generic-level phylogenetic analyses of palms
(Arecaceae) with comparisons of supertree and supermatrix approaches. Syst.
Biol. 58, 240–256. doi: 10.1093/sysbio/syp021
Balslev, H., Kahn, F., Millan, B., Svenning, J.-C., Kristiansen, T., Borchsenius, F.,
et al. (2011). Species diversity and growth forms in tropical American palm
communities. Bot. Rev. 77, 381–425. doi: 10.1007/s12229-011-9084-x
Banin, L., Feldpausch, T., Phillips, O., Baker, T., Lloyd, J., Affum-Baffoe, K.,
et al. (2012). What controls tropical forest architecture? Testing environmental, structural and ﬂoristic drivers. Glob. Ecol. Biogeogr. 21, 1179–1190. doi:
10.1111/j.1466-8238.2012.00778.x
Bjorholm, S., Svenning, J. C., Baker, W. J., Skov, F., and Balslev, H. (2006).
Historical legacies in the geographical diversity patterns of New World palm
(Arecaceae) subfamilies. Bot. J. Linn. Soc. 151, 113–125. doi: 10.1111/j.10958339.2006.00527.x
Bjorholm, S., Svenning, J. C., Skov, F., and Balslev, H. (2005). Environmental and spatial controls of palm (Arecaceae) species richness across the
Americas. Glob. Ecol. Biogeogr. 14, 423–429. doi: 10.1111/j.1466-822x.2005.
00167.x
Blach-Overgaard, A., Kissling, W. D., Dransﬁeld, J., Balslev, H., and Svenning, J.-C.
(2013). Multimillion-year climatic effects on palm species diversity in Africa.
Ecology 94, 2426–2435. doi: 10.1890/12-1577.1
Bollback, J. P. (2006). SIMMAP: stochastic character mapping of discrete traits on phylogenies. BMC Bioinform. 7:88–94. doi: 10.1186/14712105-7-88
Braconnot, P., Otto-Bliesner, B., Harrison, S., Joussaume, S., Peterchmitt, J. Y.,
Abe-Ouchi, A., et al. (2007). Results of PMIP2 coupled simulations of the
Mid-Holocene and Last Glacial Maximum - Part 1: experiments and large-scale
features. Clim. Past 3, 261–277. doi: 10.5194/cp-3-261-2007
Brummitt, R. K. (2001). World Geographical Scheme for Recording Plant Distributions. Pittsburgh: Hunt Institute for Botanical Documentation Carnegie Mellon
University.
Buerki, S., Forest, F., Stadler, T., and Alvarez, N. (2013). The abrupt climate
change at the Eocene–Oligocene boundary and the emergence of South-East
Asia triggered the spread of sapindaceous lineages. Ann. Bot. 112, 151–160. doi:
10.1093/aob/mct106

Frontiers in Genetics | Evolutionary and Population Genetics

Evolution of climbing palms

Burkill, I. H. (1966). A Dictionary of the Economic Products of the Malay Peninsula.
Kuala Lmupur: Minisitry of Agriculture and Cooperatives.
Burnham, K. P., and Anderson, D. R. (2002). Model Selection and Multimodel
Inference - a Practical Information-Theoretic Approach. New York: Springer.
Couvreur, T. L. P., and Baker, W. J. (2013). Tropical rain forest evolution: palms as a model group. BMC Biol. 11:48. doi: 10.1186/17417007-11-48
Couvreur, T. L. P., Forest, F., and Baker, W. J. (2011a). Origin and global
diversiﬁcation patterns of tropical rain forests: inferences from a complete genus-level phylogeny of palms. BMC Biol. 9:44. doi: 10.1186/17417007-9-44
Couvreur, T. L. P., Pirie, M. D., Chatrou, L. W., Saunders, R. M. K., Su,
Y. C. F., Richardson, J. E., et al. (2011b). Early evolutionary history of
the ﬂowering plant family annonaceae: steady diversiﬁcation and boreotropical geodispersal. J. Biogeogr. 38, 664–680. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2699.2010.
02434.x
Couvreur, T. L. P., Gort, G., Richardson, J. E., Sosef, M. S. M., and Chatrou, L. W.
(2010). Insights into the inﬂuence of priors in posterior mapping of discrete
morphological characters: a case study in annonaceae. PLoS ONE 5:e10473. doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0010473
Crawley, M. J. (2007). The R Book. Chichester: John Wiley & Sons Ltd. doi:
10.1002/9780470515075
Cuenca, A., and Asmussen-Lange, C. B. (2007). Phylogeny of the palm tribe chamaedoreeae (Arecaceae) based on plastid DNA sequences. Syst. Bot. 32, 250–263. doi:
10.1600/036364407781179644
Darwin, C. (1865). On the movements and habits of climbing plants. J. Linn. Soc.
Lon. Bot. 9, 1–118. doi: 10.1111/j.1095-8339.1865.tb00011.x
de Queiroz, A. (2002). Contingent predictability in evolution: key traits and
diversiﬁcation. Syst. Biol. 51, 917–929. doi: 10.1080/10635150290102627
Donoghue, M. J. (2005). Key innovations, convergence, and success: macroevolutionary lessons from plant phylogeny. Paleobiology 31, 77–93. doi: 10.1666/00948373(2005)031[0077:KICASM]2.0.CO;2
Dowe, J. L. (2010). Australian Palms: Biogeography, Ecology and Systematics.
Collingwood: CSIRO Publishing.
Dransﬁeld, J. (1978). “Growth forms of rain forest palms,” in Tropical Trees as Living
Systems, eds. P. B. Tomlinson and M. H. Zimmermann (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press), 232–246.
Dransﬁeld, J. (1979). A Manual of the Rattans of the Malay. Forest Dept., Ministry
of Primary Industries. Peninsula.
Dransﬁeld, J. (1986). “Palmae,” in Flora of Tropical East Africa, ed. R. M. Polhill
(Rotterdam: Balkema), 1–58.
Dransﬁeld, J., and Beentje, H. J. (1995). The Palms of Madagascar. Kew: Royal
Botanic Gardens and International Palm Society.
Dransﬁeld, J., Uhl, N. W., Asmussen, C. B., Baker, W. J., Harley, M. M., and Lewis,
C. E. (2008). Genera Palmarum: The Evolution and Classiﬁcation of Palms. Kew:
Kew Publishing.
Dutta, S., Tripathi, S. M., Mallick, M., Mathews, R. P., Greenwood, P. F., Rao, M. R.,
et al. (2011). Eocene out-of-India dispersal of Asian dipterocarps. Rev. Palaeobot.
Palynol. 166, 63–68. doi: 10.1016/j.revpalbo.2011.05.002
Eiserhardt, W. L., Svenning, J.-C., Baker, W. J., Couvreur, T. L., and Balslev, H.
(2013). Dispersal and niche evolution jointly shape the geographic turnover of
phylogenetic clades across continents. Sci. Rep. 3, 1164. doi: 10.1038/srep01164
Faye, A., Pintaud, J.-C., Baker, W., Sonké, B., and Couvreur, T. (2014). A plastid
phylogeny of the African rattans (Ancistrophyllinae, Arecaceae). Syst. Bot. 39,
1099–1107. doi: 10.1600/036364414X682634
FitzJohn, R. G. (2012). Diversitree: comparative phylogenetic analyses of diversiﬁcation in R. Methods Ecol. Evol. 3, 1084–1092. doi: 10.1111/j.2041210X.2012.00234.x
Gentry, A. H. (1991). “The distribution and evolution of climbing plants,” in The
Biology of Vines, eds S. Putz and H. A. Mooney (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press), 3–49.
Gianoli, E. (2004). Evolution of a climbing habit promotes diversiﬁcation in
ﬂowering plants. Proc. R. Soc. Lon. Series B Biol. Sci. 271, 2011–2015. doi:
10.1098/rspb.2004.2827
Givnish, T. J., Barfuss, M. H., Ee, B. V., Riina, R., Schulte, K., Horres, R.,
et al. (2014). Adaptive radiation, correlated and contingent evolution, and net
species diversiﬁcation in Bromeliaceae. Mol. Phylogenet. Evol. 71, 55–78. doi:
10.1016/j.ympev.2013.10.010

January 2015 | Volume 5 | Article 452 | 16

Couvreur et al.

Goldberg, E. E., and Igić, B. (2012). Tempo and mode in plant breeding system
evolution. Evolution 66, 3701–3709. doi: 10.1111/j.1558-5646.2012.01730.x
Govaerts, R., Dransﬁeld, J., Zona, S. F., Hodel, D. R., and Henderson, A. (2014).
World Checklist of Arecaceae [Online]. Facilitated by the Royal Botanic Gardens,
Kew, Available at: http://apps.kew.org/wcsp/ [Accessed 2009-03-09].
Hall, R. (2009). Southeast Asia’s changing palaeogeography. Blumea Biodivers. Evol.
Biogeogr. Plants 54, 148–161. doi: 10.3767/000651909x475941
Haywood, A. M., Dowsett, H. J., Valdes, P. J., Lunt, D. J., Francis, J. E., and Sellwood, B. W. (2009). Introduction. Pliocene climate, processes and problems.
Philos. Trans. R. Soc. A Math. Phys. Eng. Sci. 367, 3–17. doi: 10.1098/rsta.
2008.0205
Henderson, A. (2002). Evolution and Ecology of Palms. Bronx: The New York
Botanical Garden Press.
Henderson, A. (2009). Palms of Southern Asia. Princeton: Princeton University
Press. doi: 10.1515/9781400832996
Henderson, A. (2011). A revision of Desmoncus (Arecaceae). Phytotaxa 35, 1–88.
Henderson, A., Galeano, G., and Bernal, R. (1995). Field Guide to the Palms of the
Americas. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Hijmans, R. J., Cameron, S. E., Parra, J. L., Jones, P. G., and Jarvis, A. (2005). Very
high resolution interpolated climate surfaces for global land areas. Int. J. Climatol.
25, 1965–1978. doi: 10.1002/joc.1276
Huelsenbeck, J. P., Nielsen, R., and Bollback, J. P. (2003). Stochastic mapping of
morphological characters. Syst. Biol. 52, 131–158. doi: 10.1080/10635150390
192780
Isnard, S. (2006). Biomechanics and development of rattans: what is special about
Plectocomia himalayana Griff. (Calamoideae, Plectocomiinae)? Bot. J. Linn. Soc.
151, 83–91. doi: 10.1111/j.1095-8339.2006.00524.x
Isnard, S., and Rowe, N. P. (2008). The climbing habit in palms: biomechanics of
the cirrus and ﬂagellum. Am. J. Bot. 95, 1538–1547. doi: 10.3732/ajb.0700005
Isnard, S., Speck, T., and Rowe, N. P. (2005). Biomechanics and development of
the climbing habit in two species of the South American palm genus Desmoncus
(Arecaceae). Am. J. Bot. 92, 1444–1456. doi: 10.3732/ajb.92.9.1444
Jansson, R. (2003). Global patterns in endemism explained by past climatic change.
Proc. R. Soc. Lon. Series B Biol. Sci. 270, 583–590. doi: 10.1098/rspb.2002.2283
Kass, R. E., and Raftery, A. E. (1995). Bayes Factors. J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 90, 773–795.
doi: 10.1080/01621459.1995.10476572
Kissling, W. D., Baker, W. J., Balslev, H., Barfod, A. S., Borchsenius, F., Dransﬁeld,
J., et al. (2012a). Quaternary and pre Quaternary historical legacies in the global
distribution of a major tropical plant lineage. Glob. Ecol. Biogeogr. 21, 909–921.
doi: 10.1111/j.1466-8238.2011.00728.x
Kissling, W. D., Eiserhardt, W. L., Baker, W. J., Borchsenius, F., Couvreur, T. L. P.,
Balslev, H., et al. (2012b). Cenozoic imprints on the phylogenetic structure of
palm species assemblages worldwide. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 109, 7379–7384.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1120467109
Kissling, W. D., and Carl, G. (2008). Spatial autocorrelation and the selection
of simultaneous autoregressive models. Glob. Ecol. Biogeogr. 17, 59–71. doi:
10.1111/j.1466-8238.2007.00334.x
Lefsky, M. A. (2010). A global forest canopy height map from the
moderate resolution imaging spectroradiometer and the geoscience laser
altimeter system. Geophys. Res. Lett. 37:L15401. doi: 10.1029/2010gl0
43622
Linder, H. P. (2008). Plant species radiations: where, when, why? Philos. Trans. R.
Soc. B Biol. Sci. 363, 3097–3105. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2008.0075
Lohman, D. J., De Bruyn, M., Page, T., Von Rintelen, K., Hall, R., Ng, P. K., et al.
(2011). Biogeography of the Indo-Australian archipelago. Ann. Rev. Ecol. Evol.
Syst. 42, 205–226. doi: 10.1146/annurev-ecolsys-102710-145001
Lohmann, L. G., Bell, C. D., Calio, M. F., and Winkworth, R. C. (2013). Pattern and
timing of biogeographical history in the Neotropical tribe Bignonieae (Bignoniaceae). Bot. J. Linn. Soc. 171, 154–170. doi: 10.1111/j.1095-8339.2012.01311.x
Maddison, W. P., Midford, P. E., and Otto, S. P. (2007). Estimating a binary
character’s effect on speciation and extinction. Syst. Biol. 56, 701–710. doi:
10.1080/10635150701607033
Marazzi, B., Ané, C., Simon, M. F., Delgado-Salinas, A., Luckow, M., and Sanderson,
M. J. (2012). Locating evolutionary precursors on a phylogenetic tree. Evolution
66, 3918–3930. doi: 10.1111/j.1558-5646.2012.01720.x
Moreau, C. S., Bell, C. D., Vila, R., Archibald, S. B., and Pierce, N. E. (2006).
Phylogeny of the ants: diversiﬁcation in the age of angiosperms. Science 312,
101–104. doi: 10.1126/science.1124891

www.frontiersin.org

Evolution of climbing palms

Morley, R. J. (2000). Origin and Evolution of Tropical Rain Forests. New York: John
Wiley & Sons.
Morley, R. J. (2007). “Cretaceous and Tertiary climate change and the past distribution of megathermal rainforests,” in Tropical Rainforest Responses to Climatic
Changes, eds M. B. Bush and J. Flenley (Chichester: Praxis Publishing), 1–31.
Morlon, H. (2014). Phylogenetic approaches for studying diversiﬁcation. Ecol. Lett.
17, 508–525. doi: 10.1111/ele.12251
Morlon, H., Schwilk, D. W., Bryant, J. A., Marquet, P. A., Rebelo, A. G., Tauss, C.,
et al. (2011). Spatial patterns of phylogenetic diversity. Ecol. Lett. 14, 141–149.
doi: 10.1111/j.1461-0248.2010.01563.x
Nauheimer, L., Boyce, P. C., and Renner, S. S. (2012). Giant taro and its relatives: a phylogeny of the large genus Alocasia (Araceae) sheds light on Miocene
ﬂoristic exchange in the Malesian region. Mol. Phylogenet. Evol. 63, 43–51. doi:
10.1016/j.ympev.2011.12.011
Niklas, K. J. (1993). The scaling of plant height: a comparison among major
plant clades and anatomical grades. Ann. Bot. 72, 165–172. doi: 10.1006/anbo.
1993.1095
Niklas, K. J. (1994). Plant Allometry - the Scaling of Form and Process. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Paradis, E., Claude, J., and Strimmer, K. (2004). APE: analyses of phylogenetics and
evolution in R language. Bioinformatics 20, 289–290. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btg412
Phillips, O. L., Martinez, R. V., Arroyo, L., Baker, T. R., Killeen, T., Lewis, S. L., et al.
(2002). Increasing dominance of large lianas in Amazonian forests. Nature 418,
770–774. doi: 10.1038/nature00926
Pintaud, J.-C., Galeano, G., Balslev, H., Bernal, R., Borchsenius, F., Ferreira, E., et al.
(2008). The palms of South America: diversity, distribution and evolutionary
history. Revista Peruano de Biologia 15, 7–29.
Pound, M. J., Haywood, A. M., Salzmann, U., Riding, J. B., Lunt, D. J.,
and Hunter, S. J. (2011). A Tortonian (late Miocene, 11.61–7.25 Ma) global
vegetation reconstruction. Palaeogeogr. Palaeoclimatol. Palaeoecol. 300, 29–45.
doi: 10.1016/j.palaeo.2010.11.029
Putz, F. (1990). Growth habits and trellis requirements of climbing palms
(Calamus spp) in north-eastern Queensland. Aust. J. Bot. 38, 603–608. doi:
10.1071/BT9900603
Putz, F. E. (1984). The natural history of lianas on Barro Colorado Island, Panama.
Ecology 65, 1713–1724. doi: 10.2307/1937767
R Development Core Team. (2013). R: a Language and Environment for Statistical
Computing, Version 3.0.2 [Online]. Vienna: The R Foundation for Statistical
Computing. Available: http://www.R-project.org [accessed September 25, 2013].
Rabosky, D. L. (2014). Automatic detection of key innovations, rate shifts,
and diversity-dependence on phylogenetic trees. PLoS ONE 9:e89543. doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0089543
Rabosky, D. L., Donnellan, S. C., Grundler, M., and Lovette, I. J. (2014a). Analysis
and visualization of complex macroevolutionary dynamics: an example from
Australian scincid lizards. Syst. Biol. 63, 610–627. doi: 10.1093/sysbio/syu025
Rabosky, D. L., Grundler, M., Anderson, C., Shi, J. J., Brown, J. W., Huang, H., et al.
(2014b). BAMMtools: an R package for the analysis of evolutionary dynamics
on phylogenetic trees. Methods Ecol. Evol. 5, 701–707. doi: 10.1111/2041-210X.
12199
Rakotoarinivo, M., Blach-Overgaard, A., Baker, W. J., Dransﬁeld, J., Moat, J., and
Svenning, J.-C. (2013). Palaeo-precipitation is a major determinant of palm
species richness patterns across Madagascar: a tropical biodiversity hotspot. Proc.
R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 280, 20123048. doi: 10.1098/rspb.2012.3048
Rakotoarinivo, M., and Dransﬁeld, J. (2010). New species of Dypsis and Ravenea
(Arecaceae) from Madagascar. Kew Bull. 65, 279–303. doi: 10.1007/s12225-0109210-7
Revell, L. J. (2012). phytools: an R package for phylogenetic comparative biology
(and other things). Methods Ecol. Evol. 3, 217–223. doi: 10.1111/j.2041210X.2011.00169.x
Rich, P. M. (1986). Mechanical architecture of arborescent rain forest palms.
Principes 30, 117–131.
Richards, P. W. (1996). The Tropical Rain Forest: An Ecological Study, 2nd edn.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Richardson, J. E., Bakar, A. M., Tosh, J., Armstrong, K., Smedmark, J., Anderberg,
A. A., et al. (2014). The inﬂuence of tectonics, sea-level changes and dispersal on
migration and diversiﬁcation of Isonandreae (Sapotaceae). Bot. J. Linn. Soc. 174,
130–140. doi: 10.1111/boj.12108

January 2015 | Volume 5 | Article 452 | 17

Couvreur et al.

Rowe, N., Isnard, S., and Speck, T. (2004). Diversity of mechanical architectures in
climbing plants: an evolutionary perspective. J. Plant Growth Regul. 23, 108–128.
doi: 10.1007/s00344-004-0044-0
Russell, T. A. (1968). “Palmae,” in Flora of West Tropical Africa, ed. F. N. Hepper
(London: Whitefriars Press).
Sanin, M. J., and Galeano, G. (2011). A revision of the Andean wax palms, Ceroxylon
(Arecaceae). Phytotaxa 34, 1–64.
Schneider, H., Schuettpelz, E., Pryer, K. M., Cranﬁll, R., Magallón, S., and Lupia,
R. (2004). Ferns diversiﬁed in the shadow of angiosperms. Nature 428, 553–557.
doi: 10.1038/nature02361
Schnitzer, S. A. (2005). A mechanistic explanation for global patterns of liana
abundance and distribution. Am. Nat. 166, 262–276. doi: 10.1086/431250
Schnitzer, S. A., and Bongers, F. (2002). The ecology of lianas and their role in
forests. Trends Ecol. Evol. 17, 223–230. doi: 10.1016/S0169-5347(02)02491-6
Schnitzer, S. A., and Bongers, F. (2011). Increasing liana abundance and biomass in tropical forests: emerging patterns and putative mechanisms. Ecol. Lett. 14, 397–406. doi: 10.1111/j.1461-0248.2011.
01590.x
Schnitzer, S. A., and Carson, W. P. (2001). Treefall gaps and the maintenance of
species diversity in a tropical forest. Ecology 82, 913–919. doi: 10.1890/00129658(2001)082[0913:TGATMO]2.0.CO;2
Su, Y., and Saunders, R. (2009). Evolutionary divergence times in the Annonaceae:
evidence of a Late Miocene origin of Pseuduvaria in Sundaland with subsequent
diversiﬁcation in New Guinea. BMC Evol. Biol. 9:153. doi: 10.1186/1471-21489-153
Sunderland, T. C. H. (2012). A taxonomic revision of the rattans of Africa
(Arecaceae: Calamoideae). Phytotaxa 51, 1–76.
Thomas, D., Hughes, M., Phutthai, T., Ardi, W., Rajbhandary, S., Rubite, R., et al.
(2012). West to east dispersal and subsequent rapid diversiﬁcation of the mega
diverse genus Begonia (Begoniaceae) in the Malesian archipelago. J. Biogeogr. 39,
98–113. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2699.2011.02596.x

Frontiers in Genetics | Evolutionary and Population Genetics

Evolution of climbing palms

Tomlinson, P. B. (2006). The uniqueness of palms. Bot. J. Linn. Soc. 151, 5–14. doi:
10.1111/j.1095-8339.2006.00520.x
Tomlinson, P. B., and Fisher, J. B. (2000). “Stem vasculature in climbing monocotyledons: a comparative approach,” in Monocots: Systematics and Evolution, eds
K. L. Wilson and D. A. Morrison (Melbourne: CSIRO).
van der Heijden, G. M., and Phillips, O. L. (2008). What controls liana success
in Neotropical forests? Glob. Ecol. Biogeogr. 17, 372–383. doi: 10.1111/j.14668238.2007.00376.x
Wang, W., Ortiz, R. D. C., Jacques, F. M. B., Xiang, X.-G., Li, H.-L., Lin, L.,
et al. (2012). Menispermaceae and the diversiﬁcation of tropical rainforests
near the Cretaceous–Paleogene boundary. New Phytologist 195, 470–478. doi:
10.1111/j.1469-8137.2012.04158.x
Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was conducted
in the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed
as a potential conﬂict of interest.
Received: 30 May 2014; accepted: 10 December 2014; published online: 08 January
2015.
Citation: Couvreur TLP, Kissling WD, Condamine FL, Svenning J-C, Rowe NP and
Baker WJ (2015) Global diversiﬁcation of a tropical plant growth form: environmental
correlates and historical contingencies in climbing palms. Front. Genet. 5:452. doi:
10.3389/fgene.2014.00452
This article was submitted to Evolutionary and Population Genetics, a section of the
journal Frontiers in Genetics.
Copyright © 2015 Couvreur, Kissling, Condamine, Svenning, Rowe and Baker. This is
an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution
License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted,
provided the original author(s) or licensor are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use,
distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.

January 2015 | Volume 5 | Article 452 | 18

