doi: 10.1111/jeb.12385

Dioecy is associated with higher diversification rates in flowering
plants
€ ER*, H. J.
J . K AF

DE

BOER†‡§, S. MOUSSET*, A. KOOL§, M. DUFAY¶ & G. A. B. MARAIS*

*Universite Lyon 1, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, UMR5558, Laboratoire de Biometrie et Biologie Evolutive, Villeurbanne, France
†Department of Systematic Biology, Evolutionary Biology Centre, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden
‡Naturalis Biodiversity Center, Leiden, The Netherlands
§Natural History Museum, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway
¶Universite de Lille 1, Laboratoire Genetique et Evolution des Populations Vegetales, Villeneuve d’Ascq, France

Keywords:

Abstract

angiosperms;
dioecy;
diversification;
phylogenetic methods;
sister clades.

In angiosperms, dioecious clades tend to have fewer species than their nondioecious sister clades. This departure from the expected equal species richness in the standard sister clade test has been interpreted as implying that
dioecious clades diversify less and has initiated a series of studies suggesting
that dioecy might be an ’evolutionary dead end‘. However, two of us recently
showed that the ‘equal species richness‘ null hypothesis is not valid in the
case of derived char acters, such as dioecy, and proposed a new test for sister
clade comparisons; preliminary results, using a data set available in the litterature, indicated that dioecious clades migth diversify more than expected.
However, it is crucial for this new test to distinguish between ancestral and
derived cases of dioecy, a criterion that was not taken into account in the
available data set. Here, we present a new data set that was obtained by
searching the phylogenetic literature on more than 600 completely dioecious
angiosperm genera and identifying 115 sister clade pairs for which dioecy is
likely to be derived (including > 50% of the dioecious species). Applying the
new sister clade test to this new dataset, we confirm the preliminary result
that dioecy is associated with an increased diversification rate, a result that
does not support the idea that dioecy is an evolutionary dead end in angiosperms. The traits usually associated with dioecy, that is, an arborescent
growth form, abiotic pollination, fleshy fruits or a tropical distribution, do not
influence the diversification rate. Rather than a low diversification rate, the
observed species richness patterns of dioecious clades seem to be better
explained by a low transition rate to dioecy and frequent losses.

Introduction
Dioecy, that is, having separate sexes, is the norm in
many animal clades, but rather rare in flowering plants,
occurring in only about 6% of all species (Renner &
Ricklefs, 1995). Indeed, dioecy comes with some costs
(Whitfield, 2004; Otto, 2009; Lehtonen et al., 2012).
First, unisexual individuals lack the reproductive assurance that benefits self-compatible hermaphroditic speCorrespondence: Jos K€
afer, Universite Lyon 1, Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique, UMR5558, Laboratoire de Biometrie et Biologie
Evolutive, Villeurbanne, F-69622 Cedex, France.
Tel.: (+33) (0)4 72432909; fax: (+33) (0)4 72431388;
e-mail: jos.kaefer@gmail.com

1478

cies. Second, the fact that only a portion of individuals
produce seeds may result in a disadvantage at the population level, either because fewer offspring are produced or because a large production of seeds is carried
by a limited number of individuals, thus increasing offspring competition (Janzen, 1971; Maynard-Smith,
1978; Bawa, 1980; Heilbuth et al., 2001; Charlesworth,
2009). However, some of these costs are expected to be
similar for animal species with separate sexes, which
are nonetheless numerous, and the rareness of dioecious plants requires further explanation.
Apart from the debate over whether or not the
ancestor of the angiosperms had bisexual flowers (e.g.
Endress & Doyle, 2009), no reasonable doubt seems to
exist about the fact that bisexual flowers occurred early

ª 2014 THE AUTHORS. J. EVOL. BIOL. 27 (2014) 1478–1490
JOURNAL OF EVOLUTIONARY BIOLOGY ª 2014 EUROPEAN SOCIETY FOR EVOLUTIONARY BIOLOGY

Dioecy and diversification in angiosperms

in angiosperm evolution, and thus, the ancestor of all
or nearly all dioecious angiosperms probably was a
hermaphrodite with bisexual flowers (Lebel-Hardenack
& Grant, 1997; Barrett, 2002; Specht & Bartlett, 2009).
It is generally considered that the evolution of dioecy
has taken intermediate steps, such as monoecy (male
and female flowers on the same individual: Lloyd,
1972), gynodioecy (populations with female and hermaphrodite individuals: Charlesworth & Charlesworth,
1978; Maurice et al., 1994), distyly (where two flower
morphs exist, one with short styles and long stamens,
the other with long styles and short stamens: Lloyd,
1979; Pannell & Verdu, 2006) or heterodichogamy
(temporal separation of male and female functions, e.g.
Pendleton et al., 2000; Pannell & Verdu, 2006).
The transition towards dioecy might be advantageous
under certain conditions. For example, dioecy could be
a more efficient mode of reproduction, because individuals can specialize on one sexual function, or it could
evolve as a means to avoid self-pollination and the
associated inbreeding depression (Charlesworth &
Charlesworth, 1978, 1981, 1987; Bawa, 1980). Consistently, the correlation between dioecy and several other
traits, such as fleshy fruits that are dispersed by animals, a tropical distribution, abiotic pollination, small or
inconspicuous flowers or inflorescences, and an arborescent growth form (e.g. Bawa, 1980; Renner & Ricklefs, 1995), could be explained by the fact that selection
for separate sexes should be particularly strong when
associated with these traits. For example, abiotically
pollinated species are thought to face a high risk of selfing (Lloyd & Yates, 1982; Cox & Grubb, 1991), which
should increase selection for dioecy.
Nevertheless, the relative rareness of dioecy in plants
helped establish the idea that it is deleterious for plants
in the long run. An angiosperm-wide study of the diversification of dioecious lineages, using sister clade comparisons, was conducted by Heilbuth (2000), who found
that dioecious clades often possess fewer species than
their nondioecious sister clades and concluded that dioecious clades diversify less. Further work, reinterpreting
the associations of dioecy with the traits mentioned earlier, proposed that dioecious species suffer from higher
extinction rates and that these traits could alleviate the
‘handicaps’ associated with dioecy (Heilbuth et al., 2001;
Vamosi & Otto, 2002; Vamosi et al., 2003).
Recently, K€afer & Mousset (2014) revisited the relatively simple sister clade comparison framework for its
applicability to derived traits, such as dioecy. Heilbuth’s
(2000) conclusion that dioecious clades diversify less
was based on the expectation that, under equal diversification rates, the two sister clades in each pair should
be equally species rich. This expectation is indeed the
one commonly used in sister clade comparisons (e.g.
Slowinski & Guyer, 1993; Wiegmann et al., 1993; Mooers & Moller, 1996; Heilbuth, 2000; Davies et al., 2004;
Davis et al., 2010): if two groups originate from the

1479

same ancestor and diversify at equal rates, the expectation of equal species richness seems justified.
However, if the criterion to select sister clade pairs is a
trait that arose after the two clades split, unequal species
richness can arise even if both clades diversify at the
same rate (K€
afer & Mousset, 2014). This typically is the
case for derived characters, such as dioecy: one of the sisters harbours the ancestral state and inherited this state
from the common ancestor of the sisters, as represented
in Fig. 1. If one assumes that dioecy arises in a phylogeny
with a constant transition rate, then the probability that
a transition towards dioecy has occurred on a branch
increases with the length of this branch. Selecting sister
clade pairs will thus lead to biased comparisons: the stem
branches of the dioecious clades will be longer than average, whereas no effect is expected for the nondioecious
sister clade. This implies that the dioecious crown group,

Fig. 1 A pair of sister clades. A transition (star) from the ancestral
(black parts of the tree) to the dioecious state (grey parts of the
tree) took place on one of the stem branches (dashed branches).
The length of the stem branches determines the age of the crown
groups (dashed boxes).

ª 2014 THE AUTHORS. J. EVOL. BIOL. 27 (2014) 1478–1490
JOURNAL OF EVOLUTIONARY BIOLOGY ª 2014 EUROPEAN SOCIETY FOR EVOLUTIONARY BIOLOGY

1480

€ ER ET AL.
J . K AF

on average, will have started to diversify later than its
nondioecious sister (see Fig. 1). To put it differently, during the waiting time for the transition to arise on the
stem branch leading to the derived clade, the derived
clade did not diversify, whereas the sister clade could
diversify from the ancestral node on. One should thus
expect that the dioecious clades will on average be smaller than their nondioecious sisters, even when their
diversification rates are the same.
K€afer & Mousset (2014) developed a statistical test to
take this selection bias into account and showed, using
simulated trees, that the classical statistical tests (which
expect equal species richness in the sister clades) have a
very high type I error rate and thus easily lead to the
conclusion that there are differences in the diversification rate, whereas in reality there are not. They applied
the new method to the data set compiled by Heilbuth
(2000) and reached the opposite conclusion: even
though dioecious clades tend to be smaller than their
sister clades, the results of the test show that the diversification rate is actually increased in dioecious clades.
Because bisexual flowers occurred early in angiosperm evolution, most of the sister clade pairs in Heilbuth’s data set are likely to represent situations where
dioecy is derived. However, reversions from dioecy to
bisexuality are possible; in such cases, dioecy would be
the ancestral state of the clade pair, and the assumptions
of the sister clade test would be violated. K€afer & Mousset (2014) thus argued that one cannot use sister clade
comparisons for derived characters without a prior
identification of the ancestral state of the sisters. As
Heilbuth’s (2000) data did not distinguish between transitions to and reversions from dioecy, this could explain
why K€afer & Mousset detected increased diversification
associated with dioecy. Furthermore, Heilbuth constructed her data set to be conservative in accordance
with her hypothesis that dioecious clades diversify less,
by excluding genera containing dioecious species that
occur in the sister clades and by including hermaphrodites that occur in the dioecious clades. Thus, when testing the inverse hypothesis that dioecious clades
diversify more, Heilbuth’s data set is not conservative
anymore as it tends to overestimate the species richness
of the dioecious clades compared to their sisters. Finally,
more recent phylogenetic studies have changed some of
the sister group relationships since the year 2000.
The goal of this study was to construct a new data set
of dioecious clades and their nearest nondioecious sisters
to apply the test proposed by K€afer & Mousset. This data
set only includes clade pairs for which the ancestral node
was hermaphroditic, and was constructed using the most
recent insights into angiosperm phylogenetics. Using the
new sister clade test on this new data set, we find that
the diversification rate seems to increase with dioecy,
confirming the preliminary result of K€afer & Mousset.
This data set furthermore offers some insights into the
evolutionary history of dioecy in angiosperms.

Data and methods
Sister clade data set
As starting point for a new data set of dioecious clades
and their sisters, we used the list of genera containing
dioecious species compiled by Susanne Renner (September 2004). Only completely or predominantly dioecious genera were included, as resolving infra-generic
sister clades appeared to be practically impossible at the
scale of all angiosperms. For these genera (more than
600), we searched for the latest phylogenetic studies
including the genus (a total of ~170 papers) to identify
its sisters, and we checked for the occurrence of dioecious species in the sister genera. When a sister genus
was not present in the list of dioecious genera, the presence or absence of dioecy was assessed using the phylogenetic literature and online floras.
Dioecious sister genera were merged, until a nondioecious sister group was found, to obtain two monophyletic sister clades, one dioecious and the other
nondioecious. In several cases, nondioecious genera
occurred within larger dioecious groups. In some cases,
these are known reversals, but in the absence of literature, these genera were considered as reversals and
included as such in the dioecious group based on the
number of nondioecious species and their phylogenetic
position. If the phylogenetic studies did not enable the
unambiguous determination of a single sister clade
because of ill-resolved nodes (e.g. Nepenthaceae and
Sarcobatus), the dioecious clades were nevertheless
included in the data set if none of the possible sister
clades was dioecious, and information about the smallest and largest possible sister clades was retained in the
data set.
In addition to the literature study, we performed an
ancestral reconstruction using parsimony for the Malpighiales, a large order with approximately 3400 dioecious species, based on a recent phylogeny (Xi et al.,
2012). Data and methods are presented in Data S1.
Species counts for dioecious groups were taken from
Renner’s database, unless the phylogenetic studies indicated that the species count was different (e.g. Dioscorea). Species counts for sister groups were found in the
literature or looked up in Tropicos (www.tropicos.org)
and The Plant List (www.theplantlist.org).
For each pair of sister clades, we thus have an estimate of the total number of species in the dioecious
clade (d), the number of dioecious species in the dioecious clade (d*), the number of species in the sister
clade (s), and the number of nondioecious species in
the sister clade (s*). In the remainder of the text, we
will refer to the total number of species in both clades
m = d + s, and the total number of species in both
clades when species that arose after secondary transitions to dioecy or reversions to the ancestral state were
excluded, m* = d* + s*.

ª 2014 THE AUTHORS. J. EVOL. BIOL. 27 (2014) 1478–1490
JOURNAL OF EVOLUTIONARY BIOLOGY ª 2014 EUROPEAN SOCIETY FOR EVOLUTIONARY BIOLOGY

Dioecy and diversification in angiosperms

If the sister clade could not be identified unambiguously, or the number of species was not well known,
the minimum and maximum clade sizes were used for
the sister clade, smin and smax, respectively. The corresponding total sizes of the clade pair are thus
mmax = smax + d and mmin = smin + d. The relative species richness of the dioecious clade within a clade pair
is the fraction md . Unless explicitly stated, the mean
 relative species richness of the dioecious clades, md , is calculated using d and mmax throughout the text.
Analysis of diversification
These data were analysed with the method for sister
clade comparisons described by K€afer & Mousset (2014).
In short, the method estimates the length of the stem
branches of each of the clades based on the number of
species in the clades. As the probability of the occurrence of a transition is assumed to be proportional to
the branch length, the ratio of the stem branch lengths
can be used to calculate the relative probability that
either one of the clades is dioecious, assuming equal
diversification rates under the null hypothesis.
The test statistic in this method is the mean relative
 
species richness of the dioecious clade md . For each
clade pair i, di is the number of species in the dioecious
clade, and mi the number of species in both clades. The
relative species richness for one pair, mdii , is thus a value
 
P
between 0 and 1, as is the average md ¼ 1c ci¼1 mdii for
all c clade pairs in the data set. Following K€
afer &
Mousset (2014), a resampling approach is used to
 
obtain the distribution of md under the null assumption of equal diversification rates among pairs in a set
of c bipartitions with the same clade sizes. We specifically test whether the preliminary findings of K€
afer &
Mousset that dioecy increases diversification can be
confirmed, using a one-sided test with the alternative
hypothesis that dioecious clades are larger than
expected.
Apart from applying this sister clade comparison test
to the whole data set, we also extend the method here
to each individual clade pair. The probability for a clade
pair being a sister clade pair (i.e. in which one clade is
in the derived state and one in the ancestral state)
depends on the total stem branch length of the two
clades, which is estimated using the method of K€
afer &
Mousset (2014). Thus, based on the assumption that
there are no differences in diversification and that transitions occur at a constant rate, we can compute the
probability that a clade pair with total size m harbours
a transition on one of its stem branches. This allows us
to calculate, for each clade pair, an expected relative
species richness of the dioecious clade and a P-value for
the difference between the observed and expected relative species richness (Data S2, eqns 4 and 5). When
testing for differences in diversification within individ-

1481

ual clade pairs, we used two-sided P-values, as we do
not expect a priori that all dioecious clades will be larger than expected. Some could be smaller as well due
to other factors influencing the diversification rate.
The sister clade test of K€
afer & Mousset (2014) resamples the given species richness of both clades within
a pair, only swapping the character state within a clade
pair in a randomized manner, and is thus conditioned
on the observed values of both m and d. The test per
clade pair calculates the expected value of d given m and
is thus only conditioned on the observed m. This comes
with the additional assumption that the pair belongs to
a larger tree with a constant diversification rate, an
assumption that the sister clade test does not need (the
null hypothesis of the sister clade test is that the diversification rate is equal within a clade pair). Consequently, in the test per clade pair, differences between
the expected and the observed relative species richness
could be due to any deviation from this assumption.
Life-history and ecological traits
To test whether certain life-history or ecological traits
could influence the diversification rate of the dioecious
groups, data on seed dispersal (biotic vs. abiotic), mode
of pollination (biotic vs. abiotic) and geographical distribution (tropical vs. nontropical) were extracted from
Renner’s aforementioned list. We added information
about growth form, using four categories: herbs, vines
or lianas, shrubs and trees, based on botanical literature
and online floras. Given that the literature is not always
quantitative, we chose to gather in the category ‘trees’
clades that were mentioned to contain large shrubs and
trees, and in the category ‘shrubs’ clades consisting of
small and intermediate shrubs. Dwarf shrubs (< 10 cm)
were included in the category ‘herbs’. When multiple
characters were represented in a clade, it was discarded
from this analysis. The character states of the nondioecious sister clades were not taken into account.
For each of the four traits, we calculated the average
observed
relative species richness of the dioecious clade
 
( md ) per character state (e.g. abiotic vs. biotic pollination). The character states were compared using a Wilcoxon signed-rank test to test for differences between
character states in this relative species richness. Also,
an ANOVA was performed on the observed relative species richness, combining the four traits as fixed effects,
to test for interactions between these traits.

Results
Identification of dioecious clades and their sisters
Our update of Susanne Renner’s list of 994 dioecious
genera with 14 600 species yielded a list of 1018 genera
containing 16 161 species. This increase is mainly due
to taxonomic revisions modifying the number of species

ª 2014 THE AUTHORS. J. EVOL. BIOL. 27 (2014) 1478–1490
JOURNAL OF EVOLUTIONARY BIOLOGY ª 2014 EUROPEAN SOCIETY FOR EVOLUTIONARY BIOLOGY

1482

€ ER ET AL.
J . K AF

in certain genera, but we also identified some dioecious
species in closely related genera that were not included
in the original list. We identified 115 sister clade pairs
that most likely have a nondioecious ancestor, based on
a literature survey and an additional ancestral state
reconstruction using maximum parsimony for the Malpighiales. The data set was split into two according to
the degree of certainty about the ancestral state: Table
S1 lists the 100 clade pairs without reasonable doubt
concerning the ancestral state (based either on the
absence of closely related dioecious clades or on published ancestral state reconstructions; the ‘strict data
set’), and Table S2 lists the 15 remaining clade pairs for
which the ancestral state could not be determined with
the same degree of certainty, but nevertheless is very
likely to be hermaphrodite (these 15 pairs, together
with the 100 pairs from the strict data set, form the
‘extended data set’). The tables include a list of 77 references to phylogenetic and taxonomic studies that
were consulted for the retained sister clade pairs.
Of the 89 sister clade pairs from Heilbuth (2000) that
were also used by K€afer & Mousset (2014), 48 pairs are
present in the current data set. Four of those are completely identical, and the remaining 44 have seen their
species counts updated, either through small adjustments of the counts themselves, due to revisions of the
phylogenetic relations leading to the inclusion or exclusion of some taxa in the sister groups (13 pairs), or to
largely or completely different sister groups (12 pairs).
Forty-one of the clade pairs used by Heilbuth and K€
afer
& Mousset are omitted entirely from the current data
set, mostly because dioecy was shown to be ancestral
(e.g. all Apiales: Schlessmann, 2010) or we suspected it
might be ancestral, as, for example, in the Arecales,
where many transitions have occurred. Indeed, when
in such cases a reliable ancestral state reconstruction
has not yet been performed and would be difficult to
perform, the groups were discarded to minimize the
possibility of violating the test’s assumption that dioecy
always should be the derived state. In some cases, we
could not find sufficiently detailed phylogenies confirming the sister clades Heilbuth used, also leading us
to discard these dioecious clades. The net effect is that
of the 115 dioecious clades included in our extended
data set, 67 have not been included in sister clade comparisons before.
Table S3 shows the taxonomic distribution of the
dioecious species taken into account in this study (see
also Fig. 2). The data set of sister clade pairs includes
8301 dioecious species (strict data set; 9021 in the
extended data set), of the 16 161 known to us, that is,
51–56%. In comparison, Heilbuth’s data set that was
analysed by K€afer & Mousset contained 7558 dioecious
species, but according to Heilbuth, this count systematically included hermaphroditic (reverted) species in the
dioecious groups and is thus an overestimation. Of the
51 orders containing dioecious species, 39 are repre-

sented in our strict data set, 40 in the extended data
set. Only one of the nonrepresented orders had more
than 50 dioecious species: the Apiales, for which ancestral dioecy has been found (Schlessmann, 2010).
Sister clade comparison
Given the ambiguities in the data, we performed the
statistical test for sister clade comparisons (K€
afer &
Mousset, 2014) eight times: on the strict or extended
data sets, using the maximum (mmax) or minimum
(mmin) sister clade size, and including (m and d) or
excluding (m* and d*) secondary transitions and reversions, as shown in Table 1. The test assumes only one
transition in each clade pair and was thus designed to
take m and d as input; strictly speaking, using m* and
d* is a violation of the assumptions of the test. Tests
using m* and d* were nevertheless performed for completeness.
For the strict data set, the null hypothesis of equal
diversification is rejected in all cases, in favour of the
alternative hypothesis that dioecious clades are more
species rich than expected. Using the extended data set,
the comparisons of the dioecious clade with the largest
possible sister clades yielded a P-value above 5%. It is,
however, very unlikely that in all ambiguous cases the
largest sister clade is the correct one, and the comparisons using the smallest possible sister clades yielded Pvalues well below 5%.
The P-values for the comparisons that excluded species that originated after secondary transitions or reversions were slightly higher than the comparisons that
included them. This is counterintuitive at a first glance,
because if dioecy increases diversification, leaving out
dioecious groups in the sister clade and reverted groups
in the dioecious clade should accentuate the differences. However, reducing the number of species in the
clades might simply affect the power of the statistical
test.
Analysis of individual clade pairs
For each clade pair, we compared the observed relative
species richness of the dioecious clade with the
expected species richness, as calculated using eqn [5] in
Data S2. Moreover, this equation allows us to calculate
a P-value for this difference; observed and expected
species richness per clade pair, as well as the associated
P-value, are given in Table S4 and represented graphically in Fig. 2.
On average, the observed relative species richness is
below the expected value (the average observed–
expected value is 0.025 for the extended and 0.0098
for the strict data set). Note that these expected values
were obtained assuming that clade pairs were drawn
from a tree with a constant diversification rate (see
Data and methods, Analysis of diversification; and Data

ª 2014 THE AUTHORS. J. EVOL. BIOL. 27 (2014) 1478–1490
JOURNAL OF EVOLUTIONARY BIOLOGY ª 2014 EUROPEAN SOCIETY FOR EVOLUTIONARY BIOLOGY

Dioecy and diversification in angiosperms

1483

Fig. 2 Representation of the analysis of
individual clade pairs per angiosperm
order. Each point corresponds to a clade
pair: a point left of the straight line
indicates a lower-than-expected species
richness of the dioecious clade; right of
the straight line, the species richness of
the dioecious clade is higher than
expected. The expected relative species
richness for each clade pair is calculated
using eqn [5] in Data S2. The distance
of each point from the straight line is
the inverse of the log-transformed Pvalue; dotted vertical lines correspond
to P = 0.05. The angiosperm phylogeny
was obtained from the Angiosperm
Phylogeny Website (Stevens, 2001
onwards; consulted September 2013).

Table 1 Results of the sister clade comparison test on dioecious
clades and their sisters. Values in parentheses were calculated
using m* and d*.
Data

Data set

c

d

mmax, d
mmin, d
mmax, d
mmin, d

Strict
Strict
Extended
Extended

100
100
115
115

0.361
0.386
0.346
0.377

P-value

m

(0.356)
(0.381)
(0.339)
(0.370)

0.0204 (0.0400)
0.00246 (0.00641)
0.0532 (0.0983)
0.00587 (0.0139)

c = number of sister clade pairs, P-values are calculated from
10 000 iterations using a one-sided test (alternative hypothesis:
dioecious clades are larger than expected).

S2). The fact that the dioecious clades are mostly smaller than expected in this analysis, whereas the combined sister clade test found they were larger than
expected, indicates that dioecy has a tendency to evolve
in species-poor clades, a phenomenon due to the selection bias. As the probability for a branch to harbour a
transition to dioecy depends on its length, dioecious
clades will have on average longer stem branches (and
less species) than randomly drawn clades. In a tree in
which the diversification rates vary, clades with low
diversification rates will have longer branches and thus
more often present transitions to dioecy, without dioecy
being the cause of the low diversification rate. This
result does thus not contradict, but rather support the

ª 2014 THE AUTHORS. J. EVOL. BIOL. 27 (2014) 1478–1490
JOURNAL OF EVOLUTIONARY BIOLOGY ª 2014 EUROPEAN SOCIETY FOR EVOLUTIONARY BIOLOGY

1484

€ ER ET AL.
J . K AF

results from the sister clade comparison test (Table 1),
which were obtained without the assumption of a constant diversification rate throughout the angiosperms.
The corresponding P-values make it possible to accept
or reject the null hypothesis of equal diversification in
each clade pair. As we tested for both increased and
decreased diversification in each clade pair (two-sided
test), and this for 115 largely independent clade pairs,
the critical value to reject the null hypothesis after
application of the Bonferroni correction for multiple
testing is 0.025/115 = 0.000217. Only the P-value for
the pair including Amborella is below this critical value.
Low P-values (< 0.01, and thus not significant given
the Bonferroni correction) for decreased diversification
were obtained for Simmondsia (Simmondsiaceae, Caryophyllales), Gynerium (Poaceae), Symmeria (Polygonaceae)
and the Lepidobotryaceae (Celastrales). These dioecious
clades consist of 1 or 2 (Lepidobotryaceae) species being
sister to a clade with more than 1000 species. Four clade
pairs in which the dioecious clade is larger than
expected had P-values < 0.01 (but not significant): the
clade formed by the four Cucurbitales families, the Putranjivaceae, Hydrocharitaceae and the clade consisting
of the Aquifoliaceae and Helwingiaceae.
Dioecy and other traits
To test whether the growth form, the distribution and
the modes of dispersal and pollination affected the relative species richness of the dioecious clades, we used
the extended data set containing 115 clade pairs, as no
hypothesis regarding the ancestral state is needed for
Table 2 Life-history and ecological traits and the proportion of
dioecious species in the extended data set, using the maximum
estimated values of m (mmax) and the minimal estimates of m
(mmin, in parentheses). P-values are calculated with Wilcoxon’s
signed-rank test.

Dispersal
Biotic
Abiotic
Pollination
Biotic
Abiotic
Distribution
Tropical
Nontropical
Growth form
Herb
Vine or liana
Shrub
Tree

Number of clades

d

P-value

59
46

0.281 (0.313)
0.391 (0.424)

0.0784
(0.0789)

60
34

0.344 (0.379)
0.322 (0.353)

0.326
(0.373)

55
39

0.304 (0.342)
0.313 (0.349)

0.504
(0.433)

23
6
23
55

0.442
0.413
0.169
0.343

0.114 (0.243)*
0.0700 (0.138)†
0.583 (0.647)‡

m

(0.456)
(0.482)
(0.212)
(0.374)

*Herbs compared to vines, shrubs and trees.
†Herbs and vines compared to shrubs and trees.
‡Herbs, vines and shrubs compared to trees.

such a comparison. The characters and the observed
relative species richness of each of the dioecious clades
are given in Table S4.
As shown in Table 2, none of these characters significantly influenced the relative species richness of the
dioecious clade. However, several trends can be
detected: clades that consist of herbaceous or viney
dioecious plants seem to harbour higher diversification
rates than shrubby or arborescent dioecious clades. Furthermore, clades with abiotic modes of dispersal have a
higher d/m ratio than clades with biotic dispersal, a
result that is close to significance. A factorial ANOVA
(Table S5) yielded no evidence for an effect of the
interaction between the traits on species richness in
dioecious clades.

Discussion
Dioecy increases diversification
K€
afer & Mousset (2014) showed that it is important to
distinguish between derived and ancestral states of a
trait in sister clade comparisons; ignoring this distinction leads to high type I error rates in statistical tests
and could lead one to wrongly attribute differences in
species richness to differences in diversification rates.
They proposed a new test for sister clade comparisons
to study the effect of derived character states. In the
current study, we present a data set of dioecious clades
and their nondioecious sister clades, tailored for the
requirements of this test, that is, including only clade
pairs for which the ancestral state could be assigned as
nondioecious with sufficient confidence.
Using the resampling test K€
afer & Mousset proposed,
we confirm their conclusion that dioecy seems to
increase diversification moderately. Thus, the hypothesis that dioecy is an evolutionary dead end, because
dioecious species would suffer from higher extinction
and/or lower speciation rates (Heilbuth, 2000; Barrett,
2002; Vamosi et al., 2003), is not supported by our
study. Nevertheless, our results suggest that dioecy
increases diversification rates only moderately, and it
cannot be considered a ‘key innovation’ (Hunter, 1998).
Questions have been raised as to whether or not
bisexual flowers were effectively the ancestral state of
angiosperms (Endress & Doyle, 2009). However, this
ambiguity seems mainly to be caused by the placement
of the dioecious Amborella as sister to the other angiosperms, and the use of maximum parsimony to infer
the ancestral state, which ignores the branch lengths.
Whether or not the earliest angiosperm flower was
bisexual, most dioecious angiosperms are considered to
be derived from a bisexual ancestor (Lebel-Hardenack
& Grant, 1997; Tanurdzic & Banks, 2004; Specht &
Bartlett, 2009). We followed the widely accepted
view that Amborella evolved from a bisexual ancestor
based on the presence of stamen residues in the female

ª 2014 THE AUTHORS. J. EVOL. BIOL. 27 (2014) 1478–1490
JOURNAL OF EVOLUTIONARY BIOLOGY ª 2014 EUROPEAN SOCIETY FOR EVOLUTIONARY BIOLOGY

Dioecy and diversification in angiosperms

flowers (Endress & Doyle, 2009) and included it in the sister clade data set. This clade is extremely species poor (one
species) compared with its sister clade (the other angiosperms) and thus has a very low relative species richness
(cf. Fig. 2). Removing it would have strengthened our
conclusion that dioecy increases species richness.
Our sister clade data set includes more than 50% of
the known dioecious species across the angiosperm
orders. We did not include transitions to dioecy that
occurred within a genus, excluding many recent transitions to dioecy. The focus of our data set is thus on
dioecious clades that have survived for some time, and
it could be biased if these recent clades are short-lived
dioecious clades with low diversification rates. However, it is difficult to imagine that dioecy as a trait that
managed to establish itself in a species population has
such severe negative effects on diversification that it
would drive the clade to extinction immediately upon
its establishment, although this remains to be tested.
This sister clade comparison test relies on the assumption that the transition to dioecy did not coincide with
the split into two sister clades. Thus, transitions to dioecy
are assumed to be anagenetic, that is, not associated
with a speciation event (Stuessy et al., 2006). This
assumption is also (implicitly) made in theoretical studies on the evolution of dioecy, where speciation is not
taken into account (e.g. Charnov et al., 1976; Charlesworth & Charlesworth, 1978; Maurice et al., 1994), or
when viewing dioecy as an adaptation to specific conditions (e.g. Bawa, 1980). However, it is possible that
dioecy, as it concerns the reproductive organs of plants,
could be cladogenetic, that is, coincides with a speciation
that gives rise to one dioecious and one nondioecious
species due to reproductive isolation. In such a case, the
mathematics used by K€afer & Mousset (2014) would not
correctly describe the null hypothesis. However, it
should be noted that extinctions are probably common
(cf. Ricklefs, 2007; Rabosky, 2009), and it is thus very
likely that the nondioecious species that originated in
such a cladogenetic transition has no extant representatives. These extinctions tend to place the transitions on
the branches (see Fig. 1) rather than on the nodes of a
tree, and the anagenetic model might still be a better
approximation than a purely cladogenetic one that does
not take extinction into account.
Furthermore, the transition rate should be low compared with the diversification rate for this sister clade
test to be valid (K€afer & Mousset, 2014). Given the relative rarity of dioecy and the fact that its evolution
from bisexual flowers requires multiple steps, this
assumption seems justified. Secondary transitions to
dioecy after the breakdown of ancestral dioecy seem to
have a higher transition rate (e.g. Cucurbitaceae and
Euphorbiaceae, see below), but those secondary transitions were not included as clade pairs in the data set.
When we calculated deviations from the expected
relative species richness for each clade pair individu-

1485

ally (Fig. 2 and Table S4), we found that the observed
species richness of a majority of the dioecious clades
was lower than expected. At first sight, this seems to
contradict the results from the combined sister clade
comparison, where we found that dioecy increases
diversification. However, as K€
afer & Mousset (2014)
have argued, a selection of sister clades from a phylogeny is not a random selection (see also the Introduction). Assuming that transitions to dioecy occurred
with a constant rate, the longer the branch of the
tree, the higher the probability that a transition
occurred on it. Relatively long branches arise easily by
chance in a tree that resulted from a branching process with a constant diversification rate and are even
more frequent if the diversification rate was variable.
Thus, our results, which show that the majority of
dioecious clades are smaller than expected in the
analysis of individual pairs, indicates that there are
intrinsic variations of the diversification rate within
the angiosperms, a result that, in itself, is not surprising (cf. Magallon & Sanderson, 2001). This is in agreement with the hypothesis of K€
afer & Mousset (2014)
that transitions to dioecy are ‘attracted’ to long
branches merely by chance, and illustrates the utility
of resampling statistics that make no prior assumption
on clade size distributions.
For each clade pair, we calculated a P-value permitting assessment of whether or not the observed relative
species richness could have been obtained with equal
diversification rates. First, the underlying distribution
for species richness asymmetries is uniform, and
extreme asymmetries can be obtained quite easily (Farris, 1976). Basing a test of species richness on one single clade pair is therefore not a very powerful method
to detect differences in diversification rates. In our data
set, after correcting for multiple testing, only one clade
pair could be considered as having a significant difference in species richness, which is the pair consisting of
Amborella and the rest of the angiosperms. If dioecy
indeed positively influences the evolutionary success of
a group, as our overall results suggest, it might also
have contributed to the survival of ‘living fossils’ such
as Amborella by diminishing their risk of extinction. This
might also apply to nonangiosperm ‘living fossils’, such
as Welwitschia, Ginkgo and cycads.
Confirming the conclusion by K€
afer & Mousset with
an appropriate data set, we present here for the first
time quantitative evidence that dioecy has a positive
effect on the diversification rates in angiosperms,
despite the fact that the dioecious clades are mostly
smaller than their nondioecious sister clades. The idea
that dioecy would be a ‘handicap’ for plants is not supported by our analysis; one can thus not rely on this
idea to explain why dioecy is rare in the angiosperms.
This analysis and the data set necessary to conduct the
test raise several questions that will need to be
addressed, as we discuss in the next sections.

ª 2014 THE AUTHORS. J. EVOL. BIOL. 27 (2014) 1478–1490
JOURNAL OF EVOLUTIONARY BIOLOGY ª 2014 EUROPEAN SOCIETY FOR EVOLUTIONARY BIOLOGY

1486

€ ER ET AL.
J . K AF

Dioecy can be ancient and is lost frequently
The new data set that we constructed for this study
revealed that in several cases dioecy appeared early in
an order. In particular, dioecy seems to have occurred
in the common ancestor of all Apiales (Schlessmann,
2010) and in the ancestor of the four Cucurbitales families, Begoniaceae, Cucurbitaceae, Datiscaceae and Tetramelaceae (Zhang et al., 2006). Similarly, the ancestor
of the Moraceae and Urticaceae in the Rosales was
most likely dioecious (Datwyler & Weiblen, 2004), and
our analysis of the Malpighiales based on the phylogeny by Xi et al. (2012) showed that this was also the
case for the ancestor of the Euphorbiaceae, Peraceae
and Rafflesiaceae. Furthermore, we identified 38 families for which dioecy most probably was ancestral (see
Tables S1 and S2). Some of these families have only
one to a few species, so dioecy could be recent as well,
but moderately sized families with ancestral dioecy are
not rare (e.g. Pandanaceae, Restionaceae and Menispermaceae have over 500 species).
The fact that dioecy is observed ‘mostly at the tips of
phylogenetic trees’ (Heilbuth, 2000) was considered as
an indication that dioecious clades are short-lived, but
it might just be a characteristic of a trait evolving with
a low transition rate (for a similar observation, see
Scotland & Sanderson, 2004). If low diversification due
to high extinction rates is not the cause of the rareness
of dioecy in angiosperms, other hypotheses need to be
explored. It has been noted that dioecy is more frequent in ancient plant groups: 75% of the liverworts
are dioecious, 50% of the leafy mosses, 36% of the
gymnosperms and only 6% of the angiosperms (Ming
et al., 2011), which could be explained by a low transition rate, although other explanations are possible.
Interestingly, dioecy is not necessarily the major
breeding system in the groups in which it is ancestral.
The Apiales contain only 139 dioecious species (2.5%),
which is below the angiosperm average. Although the
clades formed by the Cucurbitaceae, Begoniaceae, Datiscaceae and Tetramelaceae; the Euphorbiaceae, Peraceae and Rafflesiaceae; and the Moraceae and
Urticaceae have higher-than-average proportions of
dioecious species, they are not the majority (11%, 27%
and 43%, respectively). In the Cucurbitales (Zhang
et al., 2006; Schaefer & Renner, 2010; De Boer et al.,
2012) and the Moraceae (Datwyler & Weiblen, 2004),
dioecy seems to have been lost and regained quite frequently, and genera having both dioecious and monoecious species are common. The Euphorbiaceae are less
well studied, but the occurrence of both dioecious and
monoecious species in a large number of genera seems
to indicate the same trend.
The frequent reversions from dioecy might also contribute to explain why dioecy is rare, despite the
increase in diversification that we identified. The idea
that dioecy is a stable terminal state and maybe an evo-

lutionary ‘dead end’ in plants should be reconsidered as
well (cf. Barrett, 2013). If, as our data suggest, monoecy often results from the breakdown of dioecy, the fact
that dioecy and monoecy are correlated on an angiosperm-wide scale (Renner & Ricklefs, 1995) does not
imply that in most cases dioecy evolved through monoecy (cf. Weiblen et al., 2000; Datwyler & Weiblen,
2004). Indeed, if monoecy results from the loss of
dioecy, secondary transitions to dioecy will occur from
monoecious ancestors (e.g. Weiblen, 2000; Volz & Renner, 2008), but the question remains unanswered
regarding the pathway through which dioecy originally
evolved from a hermaphroditic ancestor (cf. Barrett,
2002). Another question that will merit attention is
whether dioecy can be lost in species with sex chromosomes (cf. Ming et al., 2011).
The traits associated with dioecy have no effect on
diversification
We used this sister clade data set to investigate whether
there was a link between the increase or decrease in
diversification in dioecious clades and certain traits that
are reported to be associated with dioecy. However, we
did not find any significant correlation with the growth
form, the modes of pollination and seed dispersal (biotic
or abiotic), or the distribution (tropical or nontropical).
Thus, the conclusion by Vamosi & Vamosi (2004) that
diversification is the cause of the ‘correlates of dioecy’
could not be confirmed. Indeed, the conclusion by Vamosi & Vamosi (2004) relies heavily on classical sister
clade comparison tests, which, as shown by K€afer &
Mousset (2014), can easily lead to erroneous conclusions.
The idea that dioecy reduced diversification was often
used to explain these correlations. If dioecy is seen as a
handicap, the ecological and life-history traits to which
it is correlated are considered as ways to overcome or
avoid this handicap. This is the case for the ‘seed shadow handicap’, that is, only half of the individuals contribute to the dispersal of seeds in dioecious species
(Heilbuth et al., 2001). As dispersal through animals
leads to different, more efficient dispersal dynamics, this
would reduce the effect of the handicap (Vamosi et al.,
2007) and thus decrease the extinction risk (Vamosi &
Vamosi, 2004). However, and although the result is
only marginally significant, we found that dioecious
clades with abiotic seed dispersion tended to be relatively larger (with respect to their sister clades) than
those that use animal vectors for dispersal. It is thus
probably not diversification that causes the association
between dioecy and animal dispersal; an alternative
explanation for this association that was observed in
other studies would be that dioecy more often arises in
clades with fleshy fruits, as the larger effort in reproduction can be divided over the two sexes (Charnov
et al., 1976; Givnish, 1980).

ª 2014 THE AUTHORS. J. EVOL. BIOL. 27 (2014) 1478–1490
JOURNAL OF EVOLUTIONARY BIOLOGY ª 2014 EUROPEAN SOCIETY FOR EVOLUTIONARY BIOLOGY

Dioecy and diversification in angiosperms

A second trait showing a marginally significant effect
on the relative species richness of the dioecious clades
is the growth form: dioecious clades consisting of herbs,
vines or lianas tended to have higher diversification
rates than those consisting of shrubs and trees. Dioecy
is thought to evolve more easily in trees than in species
with smaller plant sizes, as a way to avoid geitonogamy
in self-compatible species (Maynard-Smith, 1978), or to
allow more efficient pollen dispersal in outcrossing species (Bawa, 1980). Again, these hypotheses make no
direct prediction on diversification. Our results do not
show an unambiguous effect of plant size on the species richness of dioecious clades, as the dioecious clades
with the lowest relative species richness are shrubs,
that is, those of intermediate size.
We did not find any effects of the mode of pollination, a
trait that was found to be correlated with dioecy (Renner
& Ricklefs, 1995; Vamosi et al., 2003), on the relative species richness of dioecious clades. Mostly, dioecy is considered more favourable for wind-pollinated species than for
insect-pollinated species, for several reasons. Either dioecy
more often evolves in wind-pollinated species because selfing is more likely in those species (Lloyd & Yates, 1982;
Cox & Grubb, 1991), or wind pollination more often
evolves in dioecious groups due to pollinator scarcity and
because selfing is not possible (Friedman & Barrett, 2009).
Another hypothesis supposed a negative effect of dioecy
on diversification in insect-pollinated species and
explained this as a side effect of competition for pollinators between the sexes (Vamosi & Otto, 2002), which
would also explain why dioecious species often have
inconspicuous flowers (but see Bawa, 1980; Renner &
Ricklefs, 1995). Again, our results support the hypotheses
that are not based on differences in diversification. Similarly, in the light of our results, it seems difficult to explain
the association between dioecy and a tropical distribution
by the reduction in the risks of extinction in general in
tropical habitats, as suggested by Vamosi et al. (2003).
It is interesting to note that, regardless of the sexual
system, pollination by insects is thought to cause higher
diversification rates (Kay & Sargent, 2009; Vamosi &
Vamosi, 2011). But, as wind pollination mostly is a
derived trait within the angiosperms (Linder, 1998;
Dodd et al., 1999), we would expect wind-pollinated
groups to be smaller than their sister clades even under
equal or slightly higher diversification rates, as we have
shown here for dioecy. Indeed, the conclusion that
wind-pollinated groups have lower diversification rates
than insect-pollinated groups seems most often based
on sister clade comparisons (cf. Dodd et al., 1999; Kay
& Sargent, 2009) and could thus be affected by the bias
K€afer & Mousset (2014) have reported for dioecy. Also,
because the per-branch probability of a transition in a
phylogenetic tree depends on the length of the branch
(K€afer & Mousset, 2014), derived traits might end up
on the same branch merely by chance, and an angiosperm-wide analysis could detect such an effect.

1487

Sister clade comparisons are (still) a useful tool
These past years have seen the development of several
methods for studying the evolution of traits and their
effect on species diversification on the phylogeny. These
were first limited to anagenetic binary traits (BiSSE –
binary state speciation and extinction model, Maddison
et al., 2007; FitzJohn et al., 2009) and were rapidly
extended to multistate traits (MuSSE), quantitative traits
(QuaSSE, FitzJohn, 2010), incorporating cladogenetic
transitions (ClaSSE, Goldberg & Igic, 2012; and BiSSEness, Magnuson-Ford & Otto, 2012) and other effects
(see diversitree website, http://www.zoology.ubc.ca/
prog/diversitree/). Other methods designed to detect
shifts in speciation and extinction rates (Alfaro et al.,
2009; Stadler, 2011; Drummond et al., 2012a) can be
used together with trait-based analyses. Most of these
methods account for incomplete sampling (e.g. FitzJohn
et al., 2009; Stadler, 2011; Cusimano et al., 2012).
These methods have been successfully applied to study
the effects of breeding systems and other traits on plant
diversification (Goldberg et al., 2010; Johnson et al.,
2011; Mayrose et al., 2011; Drummond et al., 2012b;
Goldberg & Igic, 2012; Igic & Busch, 2013). Thus, they
could in principle provide important data on the evolution of dioecy and the long-term survival of dioecious
species, being a more powerful alternative than the sister
clade comparisons we used here. However, a recent
investigation by Davis et al. (2013) sheds light on the
limits of these methods, by showing that the accuracy
and precision of parameter estimation of BiSSE is greatly
reduced when one character represents < 10% of the
taxa at the tips. The main problem thus seems to be
intrinsically related to the rareness of dioecy in angiosperms (~6%). We made similar observations in our
attempts to use BiSSE to study the effect of dioecy in the
genus Silene (Caryophyllaceae), a genus with 700 species
of which fewer than 20 are dioecious (Fig. S2).
Sister clade comparisons, while they undeniably lack
some of the advantages of these methods that are
explicitly phylogeny based, are a more robust alternative. The selection of only those groups that present the
character of interest, if correctly handled (K€
afer &
Mousset, 2014), enables an increase in statistical power
with only a moderate increase in computation time.
Furthermore, only relative differences in species richness are considered, so that inherent variations in
diversification rates of widely divergent clades are automatically corrected for. The statistical inference is
parameter- and, to a large extent, distribution free.
This, of course, diminishes the statistical power if the
correct underlying model can be identified, but provides a better safeguard against violations of the
assumptions.
The number of sequenced genes and organisms
increases steadily, as does the availability of more reliable phylogenies, improving the performances of more

ª 2014 THE AUTHORS. J. EVOL. BIOL. 27 (2014) 1478–1490
JOURNAL OF EVOLUTIONARY BIOLOGY ª 2014 EUROPEAN SOCIETY FOR EVOLUTIONARY BIOLOGY

1488

€ ER ET AL.
J . K AF

sophisticated tools. Also, as argued by Ricklefs & Renner (1994), it might not be the evolution of certain
breeding systems or other traits in particular that would
lead to evolutionary success, but rather the diversity
and flexibility of the traits in a group. The challenge for
future tools and studies will be to avoid the pitfalls of
overly simplistic models.

Acknowledgments
A list of dioecious genera made publicly available by
Susanne Renner was a crucial starting point for this
study. We thank Zhenxiang ‘Tallen’ Xi and Chuck
Davis (Harvard University) for sharing their Malpighiales phylogeny, and Mark Schlessman (Vassar College)
for sharing the ancestral state reconstruction of the Apiales. We further thank three anonymous referees for
constructive comments, and Dave Schmalz MA for editing and improving the text. JK, SM, MD and GABM
acknowledge funding by the Agence Nationale de la
Recherche (ANR-11-BSV7-013-03), and HdB from the
Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research (W
02.29.102).

References
Alfaro, M.E., Santini, F., Brock, C., Alamillo, H., Dornburg, A.,
Rabosky, D.L. et al. 2009. Nine exceptional radiations plus
high turnover explain species diversity in jawed vertebrates.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 106: 13410–13414.
Barrett, S.C. 2002. The evolution of plant sexual diversity. Nat.
Rev. Genet. 3: 274–284.
Barrett, S.C. 2013. The evolution of plant reproductive systems: how often are transitions irreversible? Proc. R. Soc. B
Biol. Sci. 280: 20130913.
Bawa, K.S. 1980. Evolution of dioecy in flowering plants.
Annu. Rev. Ecol. Syst. 11: 15–39.
Charlesworth, B. 2009. Fundamental concepts in genetics:
effective population size and patterns of molecular evolution
and variation. Nat. Rev. Genet. 10: 195–205.
Charlesworth, B. & Charlesworth, D. 1978. Model for evolution of dioecy and gynodioecy. Am. Nat. 112: 975–997.
Charlesworth, D. & Charlesworth, B. 1981. Allocation of
resources to male and female functions in hermaphrodites.
Biol. J. Linn. Soc. 15: 57–74.
Charlesworth, D. & Charlesworth, B. 1987. Inbreeding depression and its evolutionary consequences. Annu. Rev. Ecol. Syst.
18: 237–268.
Charnov, E.L., Maynard Smith, J. & Bull, J.J. 1976. Why be
an hermaphrodite? Nature 263: 125–126.
Cox, P.A. & Grubb, P.J. 1991. Abiotic pollination: an evolutionary escape for animal-pollinated angiosperms. Philos.
Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 333: 217–224.
Cusimano, N., Stadler, T. & Renner, S.S. 2012. A new method
for handling missing species in diversification analysis applicable to randomly or nonrandomly sampled phylogenies.
Syst. Biol. 61: 785–792.
Datwyler, S.L. & Weiblen, G.D. 2004. On the origin of the fig:
phylogenetic relationships of Moraceae from ndhF
sequences. Am. J. Bot. 91: 767–777.

Davies, T.J., Barraclough, T.G., Chase, M.W., Soltis, P.S., Soltis,
D.E. & Savolainen, V. 2004. Darwin’s abominable mystery:
insights from a supertree of the angiosperms. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 101: 1904–1909.
Davis, R.B., Baldauf, S.L. & Mayhew, P.J. 2010. The origins of
species richness in the Hymenoptera: insights from a family-level supertree. BMC Evol. Biol. 10: 109.
Davis, M.P., Midford, P.E. & Maddison, W. 2013. Exploring
power and parameter estimation of the BiSSE method for
analyzing species diversification. BMC Evol. Biol. 13: 38.
De Boer, H.J., Schaefer, H., Thulin, M. & Renner, S.S. 2012.
Evolution and loss of long-fringed petals: a case study using
a dated phylogeny of the snake gourds, Trichosanthes (Cucurbitaceae). BMC Evol. Biol. 12: 108.
Dodd, M.E., Silvertown, J. & Chase, M.W. 1999. Phylogenetic
analysis of trait evolution and species diversity variation
among angiosperm families. Evolution 53: 732–744.
Drummond, A.J., Suchard, M.A., Xie, D. & Rambaut, A.
2012a. Bayesian phylogenetics with BEAUti and the BEAST
1.7. Mol. Biol. Evol. 29: 1969–1973.
Drummond, C.S., Eastwood, R.J., Miotto, S.T. & Hughes, C.E.
2012b. Multiple continental radiations and correlates of
diversification in Lupinus (Leguminosae): testing for key
innovation with incomplete taxon sampling. Syst. Biol. 61:
443–460.
Endress, P.K. & Doyle, J.A. 2009. Reconstructing the ancestral
angiosperm flower and its initial specializations. Am. J. Bot.
96: 22–66.
Farris, J.S. 1976. Expected asymmetry of phylogenetic trees.
Syst. Zool. 25: 196–198.
FitzJohn, R.G. 2010. Quantitative traits and diversification.
Syst. Biol. 59: 619–633.
FitzJohn, R.G., Maddison, W.P. & Otto, S.P. 2009. Estimating
trait-dependent speciation and extinction rates from incompletely resolved phylogenies. Syst. Biol. 58: 595–611.
Friedman, J. & Barrett, S.C. 2009. Wind of change: new
insights on the ecology and evolution of pollination and
mating in wind-pollinated plants. Ann. Bot. 103: 1515–
1527.
Givnish, T.J. 1980. Ecological constraints on the evolution of
breeding systems in seed plants – dioecy and dispersal in
gymnosperms. Evolution 34: 959–972.
Goldberg, E.E. & Igic, B. 2012. Tempo and mode in plant
breeding system evolution. Evolution 66: 3701–3709.
Goldberg, E.E., Kohn, J.R., Lande, R., Robertson, K.A., Smith,
S.A. & Igic, B. 2010. Species selection maintains self-incompatibility. Science 330: 493–495.
Heilbuth, J.C. 2000. Lower species richness in dioecious clades.
Am. Nat. 156: 221–241.
Heilbuth, J.C., Ilves, K.L. & Otto, S.P. 2001. The consequences
of dioecy for seed dispersal: modeling the seed-shadow
handicap. Evolution 55: 880–888.
Hunter, J.P. 1998. Key innovations and the ecology of macroevolution. Trends Ecol. Evol. 13: 31–36.
Igic, B. & Busch, J.W. 2013. Is self-fertilization an evolutionary
dead end? New Phytol. 198: 386–397.
Janzen, D.H. 1971. Seed predation by animals. Annu. Rev. Ecol.
Syst. 2: 465–492.
Johnson, M.T., FitzJohn, R.G., Smith, S.D., Rausher, M.D. &
Otto, S.P. 2011. Loss of sexual recombination and segregation is associated with increased diversification in evening
primroses. Evolution 65: 3230–3240.

ª 2014 THE AUTHORS. J. EVOL. BIOL. 27 (2014) 1478–1490
JOURNAL OF EVOLUTIONARY BIOLOGY ª 2014 EUROPEAN SOCIETY FOR EVOLUTIONARY BIOLOGY

Dioecy and diversification in angiosperms

K€
afer, J. & Mousset, S. 2014. Standard sister-clade comparison
fails when testing derived character states. Syst. Biol. doi: 10.
1093/sysbio/syu024.
Kay, K.M. & Sargent, R.D. 2009. The role of animal pollination
in plant speciation: integrating ecology, geography, and
genetics. Annu. Rev. Ecol. Evol. Syst. 40: 637–656.
Lebel-Hardenack, S. & Grant, S.R. 1997. Genetics of sex determination in flowering plants. Trends Plant Sci. 2: 130–136.
Lehtonen, J., Jennions, M.D. & Kokko, H. 2012. The many
costs of sex. Trends Ecol. Evol. 27: 172–178.
Linder, H.P. 1998. Morphology and the evolution of wind pollination. In: Reproductive Biology (S.J. Owens & P.J. Rudall,
eds), pp. 123–135. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, London.
Lloyd, D.G. 1972. Breeding systems in Cotula L. (Compositae,
Anthemideae). New Phytol. 71: 1181–1194.
Lloyd, D.G. 1979. Parental strategies of angiosperms. N.Z. J.
Bot. 17: 595–606.
Lloyd, D.G. & Yates, J.M. 1982. Intrasexual selection and the
segregation of pollen and stigmas in hermaphrodite plants,
exemplified by Wahlenbergia albomarginata (Campanulaceae).
Evolution 36: 903–913.
Maddison, W.P., Midford, P.E. & Otto, S.P. 2007. Estimating a
binary character’s effect on speciation and extinction. Syst.
Biol. 56: 701–710.
Magallon, S. & Sanderson, M.J. 2001. Absolute diversification
rates in angiosperm clades. Evolution 55: 1762–1780.
Magnuson-Ford, K. & Otto, S.P. 2012. Linking the investigations of character evolution and species diversification. Am.
Nat. 180: 225–245.
Maurice, S., Belhassen, E., Couvet, D. & Gouyon, P.H. 1994.
Evolution of dioecy: can nuclear-cytoplasmic interactions
select for maleness? Heredity 73: 346–354.
Maynard-Smith, J.M. 1978. The Evolution of Sex. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Mayrose, I., Zhan, S.H., Rothfels, C.J., Magnuson-Ford, K., Barker, M.S., Rieseberg, L.H. et al. 2011. Recently formed polyploid plants diversify at lower rates. Science 333: 1257–1257.
Ming, R., Bendahmane, A. & Renner, S.S. 2011. Sex chromosomes in land plants. Annu. Rev. Plant Biol. 62: 485–514.
Mooers, A.O. & Moller, A.P. 1996. Colonial breeding and speciation in birds. Evol. Ecol. 10: 375–385.
Otto, S.P. 2009. The evolutionary enigma of sex. Am. Nat. 174:
S1–S14.
Pannell, J.R. & Verdu, M. 2006. The evolution of gender specialization from dimorphic hermaphroditism: paths from heterodichogamy to gynodioecy and androdioecy. Evolution 60:
660–673.
Pendleton, R.L., Freeman, D.C., McArthur, E.D. & Sanderson,
S.C. 2000. Gender specialization in heterodichogamous Grayia brandegei (Chenopodiaceae): evidence for an alternative
pathway to dioecy. Am. J. Bot. 87: 508–516.
Rabosky, D.L. 2009. Heritability of extinction rates links diversification patterns in molecular phylogenies and fossils. Syst.
Biol. 58: 629–640.
Renner, S.S. & Ricklefs, R.E. 1995. Dioecy and its correlates in
the flowering plants. Am. J. Bot. 82: 596–606.
Ricklefs, R.E. 2007. Estimating diversification rates from phylogenetic information. Trends Ecol. Evol. 22: 601–610.
Ricklefs, R.E. & Renner, S.S. 1994. Species richness within
families of flowering plants. Evolution 48: 1619–1636.
Schaefer, H. & Renner, S.S. 2010. A three-genome phylogeny
of Momordica (Cucurbitaceae) suggests seven returns from

1489

dioecy to monoecy and recent long-distance dispersal to
Asia. Mol. Phylogenet. Evol. 54: 553–560.
Schlessmann, M.A. 2010. Major events in the evolution of
sexual systems in Apiales: ancestral andromonoecy abandoned. Plant Divers. Evol. 128: 233–245.
Scotland, R.W. & Sanderson, M.J. 2004. The significance of
few versus many in the tree of life. Science 303: 643.
Slowinski, J.B. & Guyer, C. 1993. Testing whether certain
traits have caused amplified diversification: an improved
method based on a model of random speciation and extinction. Am. Nat. 142: 1019–1024.
Specht, C.D. & Bartlett, M.E. 2009. Flower evolution: the origin and subsequent diversification of the angiosperm flower.
Annu. Rev. Ecol. Evol. Syst. 40: 217–243.
Stadler, T. 2011. Mammalian phylogeny reveals recent diversification rate shifts. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 108: 6187–6192.
Stevens, P.F. 2001 onwards. Angiosperm Phylogeny Website.
Version 12, July 2012. See http://www.mobot.org/MOBOT/
research/APweb/. Accessed 30 September 2013.
Stuessy, T.F., Jakubowsky, G., G
omez, R.S., Pfosser, M.,
Schl€
uter, P.M., Fer, T. et al. 2006. Anagenetic evolution in
island plants. J. Biogeogr. 33: 1259–1265.
Tanurdzic, M. & Banks, J.A. 2004. Sex-determining mechanisms in land plants. Plant Cell 16: S61–S71.
Vamosi, J.C. & Otto, S.P. 2002. When looks can kill: the evolution of sexually dimorphic floral display and the extinction
of dioecious plants. Proc. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 269: 1187–1194.
Vamosi, J.C. & Vamosi, S.M. 2004. The role of diversification
in causing the correlates of dioecy. Evolution 58: 723–731.
Vamosi, J.C. & Vamosi, S.M. 2011. Factors influencing diversification in angiosperms: at the crossroads of intrinsic and
extrinsic traits. Am. J. Bot. 98: 460–471.
Vamosi, J.C., Otto, S.P. & Barrett, S.C. 2003. Phylogenetic
analysis of the ecological correlates of dioecy in angiosperms.
J. Evol. Biol. 16: 1006–1018.
Vamosi, J.C., Zhang, Y. & Wilson, W.G. 2007. Animal dispersal
dynamics promoting dioecy over hermaphroditism. Am. Nat.
170: 485–491.
Volz, S.M. & Renner, S.S. 2008. Hybridization, polyploidy, and
evolutionary transitions between monoecy and dioecy in
Bryonia (Cucurbitaceae). Am. J. Bot. 95: 1297–1306.
Weiblen, G.D. 2000. Phylogenetic relationships of functionally
dioecious Ficus (Moraceae) based on ribosomal DNA
sequences and morphology. Am. J. Bot. 87: 1342–1357.
Weiblen, G.D., Oyama, R.K. & Donoghue, M.J. 2000. Phylogenetic analysis of dioecy in monocotyledons. Am. Nat. 155:
46–58.
Whitfield, J. 2004. Everything you always wanted to know
about sexes. PLoS Biol. 2: e183.
Wiegmann, B.M., Mitter, C. & Farrell, B. 1993. Diversification
of carnivorous parasitic insects – extraordinary radiation or
specialized dead-end. Am. Nat. 142: 737–754.
Xi, Z., Ruhfel, B.R., Schaefer, H., Amorim, A.M., Sugumaran,
M., Wurdack, K.J. et al. 2012. Phylogenomics and a posteriori
data partitioning resolve the Cretaceous angiosperm radiation Malpighiales. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 109: 17519–
17524.
Zhang, L.B., Simmons, M.P., Kocyan, A. & Renner, S.S. 2006.
Phylogeny of the Cucurbitales based on DNA sequences of
nine loci from three genomes: implications for morphological and sexual system evolution. Mol. Phylogenet. Evol. 39:
305–322.

ª 2014 THE AUTHORS. J. EVOL. BIOL. 27 (2014) 1478–1490
JOURNAL OF EVOLUTIONARY BIOLOGY ª 2014 EUROPEAN SOCIETY FOR EVOLUTIONARY BIOLOGY

1490

€ ER ET AL.
J . K AF

Supporting information
Additional Supporting Information may be found in the
online version of this article:
Figure S1 Reconstruction of ancestral reproductive systems of the Malpighiales using maximum parsimony in
Mesquite.
Figure S2 Power of BiSSE to detect differences in
diversification on simulated trees of 700 species.
Table S1 Dioecious clades and their sister clades. Part 1:
strict dataset.
Table S2 Dioecious clades and their sister clades. Part 2:
clade pairs added to form the extended dataset.

Table S3 Taxonomical distribution of the dioecious
species included in the study.
Table S4 Ecological and life-history traits of the analysed dioecious clades, their observed and expected relative species richnesses, and the P-value for this
difference.
Table S5 Test for interaction of the ecological and lifehistory traits using an ANOVA.
Data S1 Malpighiales.
Data S2 Supplementary methods.
Received 16 October 2013; revised 23 March 2014; accepted 28 March
2014

ª 2014 THE AUTHORS. J. EVOL. BIOL. 27 (2014) 1478–1490
JOURNAL OF EVOLUTIONARY BIOLOGY ª 2014 EUROPEAN SOCIETY FOR EVOLUTIONARY BIOLOGY

